THE BOOK OF GENESIS

This book is so called from its treating of the GENERATION, that is,
of the creation and the beginning of the world. The Hebrews call it
BERESITH, from the Word with which it begins. It contains not only
the history of the Creation of the world; but also an account of its
progress during the space of 2369 years, that is, until the death of
JOSEPH.


Genesis Chapter 1

God createth Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, in six days.

1:1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.

1:2. And the earth was void and empty, and darkness was upon the face of
the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters.

1:3. And God said: Be light made. And light was made.

1:4. And God saw the light that it was good; and he divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5. And he called the light Day, and the darkness Night; and there was
evening and morning one day.

1:6. And God said: Let there be a firmament made amidst the waters: and
let it divide the waters from the waters.

A firmament... By this name is here understood the whole space between
the earth, and the highest stars. The lower part of which divideth the
waters that are upon the earth, from those that are above in the clouds.

1:7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under
the firmament, from those that were above the firmament, and it was so.

1:8. And God called the firmament, Heaven; and the evening and morning
were the second day.

1:9. God also said; Let the waters that are under the heaven, be
gathered together into one place: and let the dry land appear. And it
was so done.

1:10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.

1:11. And he said: let the earth bring forth green herb, and such as may
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, which may have
seed in itself upon the earth. And it was so done.

1:12. And the earth brought forth the green herb, and such as yieldeth
seed according to its kind, and the tree that beareth fruit, having seed
each one according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14. And God said: Let there be lights made in the firmament of heaven,
to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days and years:

1:15. To shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the
earth, and it was so done.

1:16. And God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day;
and a lesser light to rule the night: and the stars.

Two great lights... God created on the first day, light, which being
moved from east to west, by its rising and setting, made morning and
evening. But on the fourth day he ordered and distributed this light,
and made the sun, moon, and stars. The moon, though much less than the
stars, is here called a great light, from its giving a far greater light
to the earth than any of them.

1:17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
earth.

1:18. And to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light and the
darkness. And God saw that it was good.

1:19. And the evening and morning were the fourth day.

1:20. God also said: let the waters bring forth the creeping creature
having life, and the fowl that may fly over the earth under the
firmament of heaven.

1:21. And God created the great whales, and every living and moving
creature, which the waters brought forth, according to their kinds, and
every winged fowl according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:22. And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth.

1:23. And the evening and morning were the fifth day.

1:24. And God said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature in its
kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth, according to
their kinds. And it was so done.

1:25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds, and
cattle, and every thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind. And
God saw that it was good.

1:26. And he said: Let us make man to our image and likeness: and let
him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every creeping creature that
moveth upon the earth.

Let us make man to our image... This image of God in man, is not in the
body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with
understanding and free will. God speaketh here in the plural number, to
insinuate the plurality of persons in the Deity.

1:27. And God created man to his own image: to the image of God he
created him: male and female he created them.

1:28. And God blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls
of the air, and all living creatures that move upon the earth.

Increase and multiply... This is not a precept, as some Protestant
controvertists would have it, but a blessing, rendering them fruitful;
for God had said the same words to the fishes, and birds, (ver. 22) who
were incapable of receiving a precept.

1:29. And God said: Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed upon
the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of their own kind,
to be your meat:

1:30. And to all beasts of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
to all that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they
may have to feed upon. And it was so done.

1:31. And God saw all the things that he had made, and they were very
good. And the evening and morning were the sixth day.

Genesis Chapter 2

God resteth on the seventh day and blesseth it. The earthly paradise, in
which God placeth man. He commandeth him not to eat of the tree of
knowledge. And formeth a woman of his rib.

2:1. So the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the furniture
of them.

2:2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.

He rested, etc... That is, he ceased to make or create any new kinds of
things. Though, as our Lord tells us, John 5.17, "He still worketh",
viz., by conserving and governing all things, and creating souls.

2:3. And he blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because in it he
had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4. These are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they
were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heaven and the
earth:

2:5. And every plant of the field before it sprung up in the earth, and
every herb of the ground before it grew: for the Lord God had not rained
upon the earth; and there was not a man to till the earth.

2:6. But a spring rose out of the earth, watering all the surface of the
earth.

2:7. And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth: and breathed
into his face the breath of life, and man became a living soul.

2:8. And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the
beginning: wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

2:9. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees,
fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the tree of life also in the
midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

The tree of life... So called because it had that quality, that by
eating of the fruit of it, man would have been preserved in a constant
state of health, vigour, and strength, and would not have died at all.
The tree of knowledge... To which the deceitful serpent falsely
attributed the power of imparting a superior kind of knowledge, beyond
that which God was pleased to give.

2:10. And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise,
which from thence is divided into four heads.

2:11. The name of the one is Phison: that is it which compasseth all the
land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

2:12. And the gold of that land is very good: there is found bdellium,
and the onyx stone.

2:13. And the name of the second river is Gehon: the same is it that
compasseth all the land of Ethiopia.

2:14. And the name of the third river is Tigris: the same passeth along
by the Assyrians. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15. And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of
pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it.

2:16. And he commanded him, saying: Of every tree of paradise thou shalt
eat:

2:17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat.
For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the death.

2:18. And the Lord God said: It is not good for man to be alone: let us
make him a help like unto himself.

2:19. And the Lord God having formed out of the ground all the beasts of
the earth, and all the fowls of the air, brought them to Adam to see
what he would call them: for whatsoever Adam called any living creature
the same is its name.

2:20. And Adam called all the beasts by their names, and all the fowls
of the air, and all the cattle of the field: but for Adam there was not
found a helper like himself.

2:21. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam: and when he was
fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it.

2:22. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a
woman: and brought her to Adam.

2:23. And Adam said: This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24. Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife: and they shall be two in one flesh.

2:25. And they were both naked: to wit, Adam and his wife: and were not
ashamed.

Genesis Chapter 3

The serpent's craft. The fall of our first parents. Their punishment.
The promise of a Redeemer.

3:1. Now the serpent was more subtle than any of the beasts of the earth
which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman: Why hath God
commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree of paradise?

3:2. And the woman answered him, saying: Of the fruit of the trees that
are in paradise we do eat:

3:3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of paradise, God
hath commanded us that we should not eat; and that we should not touch
it, lest perhaps we die.

3:4. And the serpent said to the woman: No, you shall not die the death.

3:5. For God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened: and you shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil.

3:6. And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the
eyes, and delightful to behold: and she took of the fruit thereof, and
did eat, and gave to her husband, who did eat.

3:7. And the eyes of them both were opened: and when they perceived
themselves to be naked, they sewed together fig leaves, and made
themselves aprons.

And the eyes, etc... Not that they were blind before, (for the woman saw
that the tree was fair to the eyes, ver. 6.) nor yet that their eyes
were opened to any more perfect knowledge of good; but only to the
unhappy experience of having lost the good of original grace and
innocence, and incurred the dreadful evil of sin. From whence followed a
shame of their being naked; which they minded not before; because being
now stript of original grace, they quickly began to be subject to the
shameful rebellions of the flesh.

3:8. And when they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in paradise
at the afternoon air, Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of
the Lord God, amidst the trees of paradise.

3:9. And the Lord God called Adam, and said to him: Where art thou?

3:10. And he said: I heard thy voice in paradise; and I was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid myself.

3:11. And he said to him: And who hath told thee that thou wast naked,
but that thou hast eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldst not eat?

3:12. And Adam said: The woman, whom thou gavest me to be my companion,
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13. And the Lord God said to the woman: Why hast thou done this? And
she answered: The serpent deceived me, and I did eat.

3:14. And the Lord God said to the serpent: Because thou hast done this
thing, thou art cursed among all cattle, and beasts of the earth: upon
thy breast shalt thou go, and earth shalt thou eat all the days of thy
life.

3:15. I will put enmities between thee and the woman, and thy seed and
her seed: she shall crush thy head, and thou shalt lie in wait for her
heel.

She shall crush... Ipsa, the woman; so divers of the fathers read this
place, conformably to the Latin: others read it ipsum, viz., the seed.
The sense is the same: for it is by her seed, Jesus Christ, that the
woman crushes the serpent's head.

3:16. To the woman also he said: I will multiply thy sorrows, and thy
conceptions: in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, and thou shalt
be under thy husband's power, and he shall have dominion over thee.

3:17. And to Adam he said: Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee, that
thou shouldst not eat, cursed is the earth in thy work: with labour and
toil shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy life.

3:18. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt
eat the herbs of the earth.

3:19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return to
the earth out of which thou wast taken: for dust thou art, and into dust
thou shalt return.

3:20. And Adam called the name of his wife Eve: because she was the
mother of all the living.

3:21. And the Lord God made for Adam and his wife garments of skins, and
clothed them.

3:22. And he said: Behold Adam is become as one of us, knowing good and
evil: now therefore lest perhaps he put forth his hand and take also of
the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.

Behold Adam, etc... This was spoken by way of reproaching him with his
pride, in affecting a knowledge that might make him like to God.

3:23. And the Lord God sent him out of the paradise of pleasure, to till
the earth from which he was taken.

3:24. And he cast out Adam: and placed before the paradise of pleasure
Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way of
the tree of life.

Genesis Chapter 4

The history of Cain and Abel.

4:1. And Adam knew Eve his wife; who conceived and brought forth Cain,
saying: I have gotten a man through God.

4:2. And again she brought forth his brother Abel. And Abel was a
shepherd, and Cain a husbandman.

4:3. And it came to pass after many days, that Cain offered, of the
fruits of the earth, gifts to the Lord.

4:4. Abel also offered of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat:
and the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offerings.

Had respect... That is, shewed his acceptance of his sacrifice (as
coming from a heart full of devotion): and that, as we may suppose, by
some visible token, such as sending fire from heaven upon his offerings.

4:5. But to Cain and his offerings he had no respect: and Cain was
exceeding angry, and his countenance fell.

4:6. And the Lord said to him: Why art thou angry? and why is thy
countenance fallen?

4:7. If thou do well, shalt thou not receive? but if ill, shall not sin
forthwith be present at the door? but the lust thereof shall be under
thee, and thou shalt have dominion over it.

4:8. And Cain said to Abel his brother: Let us go forth abroad. And when
they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and slew
him.

4:9. And the Lord said to Cain: Where is thy brother Abel? And he
answered: I know not: am I my brother's keeper?

4:10. And he said to him: What hast thou done? the voice of thy
brother's blood crieth to me from the earth.

4:11. Now therefore cursed shalt thou be upon the earth, which hath
opened her mouth and received the blood of thy brother at thy hand.

4:12. When thou shalt till it, it shall not yield to thee its fruit: a
fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be upon the earth.

4:13. And Cain said to the Lord: My iniquity is greater than that I may
deserve pardon.

4:14. Behold thou dost cast me out this day from the face of the earth,
and from thy face I shall be hid, and I shall be a vagabond and a
fugitive on the earth: every one therefore that findeth me, shall kill
me.

Every one that findeth me shall kill me... His guilty conscience made
him fear his own brothers and nephews; of whom, by this time, there might
be a good number upon the earth; which had now endured near 130 years;
as may be gathered from Gen. 5.3, compared with chap. 4.25, though in
the compendious account given in the scriptures, only Cain and Abel are
mentioned.

4:15. And the Lord said to him: No, it shall not so be: but whosoever
shall kill Cain, shall be punished sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark
upon Cain, that whosoever found him should not kill him.

Set a mark, etc... The more common opinion of the interpreters of holy
writ supposes this mark to have been a trembling of the body; or a
horror and consternation in his countenance.

4:16. And Cain went out from the face of the Lord, and dwelt as a
fugitive on the earth at the east side of Eden.

4:17. And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and brought forth
Henoch: and he built a city, and called the name thereof by the name of
his son Henoch.

His wife... She was a daughter of Adam, and Cain's own sister; God
dispensing with such marriages in the beginning of the world, as mankind
could not otherwise be propagated. He built a city, viz... In process of
time, when his race was multiplied, so as to be numerous enough to
people it. For in the many hundred years he lived, his race might be
multiplied even to millions.

4:18. And Henoch begot Irad, and Irad begot Maviael, and Maviael begot
Mathusael, and Mathusael begot Lamech,

4:19. Who took two wives: the name of the one was Ada, and the name of
the other Sella.

4:20. And Ada brought forth Jabel: who was the father of such as dwell
in tents, and of herdsmen.

4:21. And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of them that
play upon the harp and the organs.

4:22. Sella also brought forth Tubalcain, who was a hammerer and
artificer in every work of brass and iron. And the sister of Tubalcain
was Noema.

4:23. And Lamech said to his wives Ada and Sella: Hear my voice, ye
wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech: for I have slain a man to the
wounding of myself, and a stripling to my own bruising.

I have slain a man, etc... It is the tradition of the Hebrews, that
Lamech in hunting slew Cain, mistaking him for a wild beast; and that
having discovered what he had done, he beat so unmercifully the youth,
by whom he was led into that mistake, that he died of the blows.

4:24. Sevenfold vengeance shall be taken for Cain: but for Lamech
seventy times sevenfold.

4:25. Adam also knew his wife again: and she brought forth a son, and
called his name Seth, saying: God hath given me another seed for Abel,
whom Cain slew.

4:26. But to Seth also was born a son, whom he called Enos: this man
began to call upon the name of the Lord.

Began to call upon, etc... Not that Adam and Seth had not called upon
God, before the birth of Enos; but that Enos used more solemnity in the
worship and invocation of God.

Genesis Chapter 5

The genealogy, age, and death of the Patriarchs, from Adam to Noe. The
translation of Henoch.

5:1. This is the book of the generation of Adam. In the day that God
created man, he made him to the likeness of God.

5:2. He created them male and female; and blessed them: and called their
name Adam, in the day when they were created.

5:3. And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begot a son to his
own image and likeness, and called his name Seth.

5:4. And the days of Adam, after he begot Seth, were eight hundred
years: and he begot sons and daughters.

5:5. And all the time that Adam lived, came to nine hundred and thirty
years, and he died.

5:6. Seth also lived a hundred and five years, and begot Enos.

5:7. And Seth lived after he begot Enos, eight hundred and seven years,
and begot sons and daughters.

5:8. And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and he
died.

5:9. And Enos lived ninety years, and begot Cainan.

5:10. After whose birth he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and
begot sons and daughters.

5:11. And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years, and he
died.

5:12. And Cainan lived seventy years, and begot Malaleel.

5:13. And Cainan lived after he begot Malaleel, eight hundred and forty
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:14. And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years, and he
died.

5:15. And Malaleel lived sixty-five years and begot Jared.

5:16. And Malaleel lived after he begot Jared, eight hundred and thirty
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:17. And all the days of Malaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five
years, and he died.

5:18. And Jared lived a hundred and sixty-two years, and begot Henoch.

5:19. And Jared lived after he begot Henoch, eight hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

5:20. And all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years,
and he died.

5:21. And Henoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Mathusala.

5:22. And Henoch walked with God: and lived after he begot Mathusala,
three hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:23. And all the days of Henoch were three hundred and sixty-five
years.

5:24. And he walked with God, and was seen no more: because God took
him.

5:25. And Mathusala lived a hundred and eighty-seven years, and begot
Lamech.

5:26. And Mathlusala lived after he begot Lamech, seven hundred and
eighty-two years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:27. And all the days of Mathusala were nine hundred and sixty-nine
years, and he died.

5:28. And Lamech lived a hundred and eighty-two years, and begot a son.

5:29. And he called his name Noe, saying: This same shall comfort us
from the works and labours of our hands on the earth, which the Lord
hath cursed.

5:30. And Lamech lived after he begot Noe, five hundred and ninety-five
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:31. And all the days of Lamech came to seven hundred and seventy-seven
years, and he died. And Noe, when he was five hundred years old, begot
Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

Genesis Chapter 6

Man's sin is the cause of the deluge. Noe is commanded to build the ark.

6:1. And after that men began to be multiplied upon the earth, and
daughters were born to them,

6:2. The sons of God seeing the daughters of men, that they were fair,
took to themselves wives of all which they chose.

The sons of God... The descendants of Seth and Enos are here called sons
of God from their religion and piety: whereas the ungodly race of Cain,
who by their carnal affections lay grovelling upon the earth, are called
the children of men. The unhappy consequence of the former marrying with
the latter, ought to be a warning to Christians to be very circumspect
in their marriages; and not to suffer themselves to be determined in
their choice by their carnal passion, to the prejudice of virtue or
religion.

6:3. And God said: My spirit shall not remain in man for ever, because
he is flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.

His days shall be, etc... The meaning is, that man's days, which before
the flood were usually 900 years, should now be reduced to 120 years. Or
rather, that God would allow men this term of 120 years, for their
repentance and conversion, before he would send the deluge.

6:4. Now giants were upon the earth in those days. For after the sons of
God went in to the daughters of men, and they brought forth children,
these are the mighty men of old, men of renown.

Giants... It is likely the generality of men before the flood were of a
gigantic stature in comparison with what men now are. But these here
spoken of are called giants, as being not only tall in stature, but
violent and savage in their dispositions, and mere monsters of cruelty
and lust.

6:5. And God seeing that the wickedness of men was great on the earth,
and that all the thought of their heart was bent upon evil at all times,

6:6. It repented him that he had made man on the earth. And being
touched inwardly with sorrow of heart,

It repented him, etc... God, who is unchangeable, is not capable of
repentance, grief, or any other passion. But these expressions are used
to declare the enormity of the sins of men, which was so provoking as to
determine their Creator to destroy these his creatures, whom before he
had so much favoured.

6:7. He said: I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, from man even to beasts, from the creeping thing even to the
fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that I have made them.

6:8. But Noe found grace before the Lord.

6:9. These are the generations of Noe: Noe was a just and perfect man in
his generations, he walked with God.

6:10. And he begot three sons, Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

6:11. And the earth was corrupted before God, and was filled with
iniquity.

6:12. And when God had seen that the earth was corrupted (for all flesh
had corrupted its way upon the earth),

6:13. He said to Noe: The end of all flesh is come before me, the earth
is filled with iniquity through them, and I will destroy them with the
earth.

6:14. Make thee an ark of timber planks: thou shalt make little rooms in
the ark, and thou shalt pitch it within and without.

6:15. And thus shalt thou make it. The length of the ark shall be three
hundred cubits: the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it
thirty cubits.

Three hundred cubits, etc... The ark, according to the dimensions here
set down, contained four hundred and fifty thousand square cubits; which
was more than enough to contain all the kinds of living creatures, with
all necessary provisions: even supposing the cubits here spoken of to
have been only a foot and a half each, which was the least king of
cubits.

6:16. Thou shalt make a window in the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish the top of it: and the door of the ark thou shalt set in the
side: with lower, middle chambers, and third stories shalt thou make it.

6:17. Behold, I will bring the waters of a great flood upon the earth,
to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life under heaven. All
things that are in the earth shall be consumed.

6:18. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt enter
into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and the wives of thy sons
with thee.

6:19. And of every living creature of all flesh, thou shalt bring two of
a sort into the ark, that they may live with thee: of the male sex, and
the female.

6:20. Of fowls according to their kind, and of beasts in their kind, and
of every thing that creepeth on the earth according to its kind: two of
every sort shall go in with thee, that they may live.

6:21. Thou shalt take unto thee of all food that may be eaten, and thou
shalt lay it up with thee: and it shall be food for thee and them.

6:22. And Noe did all things which God commanded him.

Genesis Chapter 7

Noe with his family go into the ark. The deluge overflows the earth.

7:1. And the Lord said to him: Go in, thou and all thy house, into the
ark: for thee I have seen just before me in this generation.

7:2. Of all clean beasts take seven and seven, the male and the female.

Of all clean... The distintion of clean and unclean beasts appears to
have been made before the law of Moses, which was not promulgated till
the year of the world 2514.

7:3. But of the beasts that are unclean two and two, the male and the
female. Of the fowls also of the air seven and seven, the male and the
female: that seed may be saved upon the face of the whole earth.

7:4. For yet a while, and after seven days, I will rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights: and I will destroy every substance that I
have made, from the face of the earth.

7:5. And Noe did all things which the Lord had commanded him.

7:6. And he was six hundred years old, when the waters of the flood
overflowed the earth.

7:7. And Noe went in and his sons, his wife and the wives of his sons
with him into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8. And of beasts clean and unclean, and of fowls, and of every thing
that moveth upon the earth,

7:9. Two and two went in to Noe into the ark, male and female, as the
Lord had commanded Noe.

7:10. And after the seven days were passed, the waters of the flood
overflowed the earth.

7:11. In the six hundredth year of the life of Noe, in the second month,
in the seventeenth day of the month, all the fountains of the great deep
were broken up, and the floodgates of heaven were opened:

7:12. And the rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13. In the selfsame day Noe, and Sem, and Cham, and Japheth, his sons:
his wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, went into the ark.

7:14. They and every beast according to its kind, and all the cattle in
their kind, and every thing that moveth upon the earth, according to its
kind, and every fowl according to its kind, all birds, and all that fly,

7:15. Went in to Noe into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein was
the breath of life.

7:16. And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in on the outside.

7:17. And the flood was forty days upon the earth: and the waters
increased, and lifted up the ark on high from the earth.

7:18. For they overflowed exceedingly: and filled all on the face of the
earth: and the ark was carried upon the waters.

7:19. And the waters prevailed beyond measure upon the earth: and all
the high mountains under the whole heaven were covered.

7:20. The water was fifteen cubits higher than the mountains which it
covered.

7:21. And all flesh was destroyed that moved upon the earth, both of
fowl and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all creeping things that creep
upon the earth: and all men.

7:22. And all things wherein there is the breath of life on the earth,
died.

7:23. And he destroyed all the substance that was upon the earth, from
man even to beast, and the creeping things and fowls of the air: and
they were destroyed from the earth: and Noe only remained, and they that
were with him in the ark.

7:24. And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.

Genesis Chapter 8

The deluge ceaseth. Noe goeth out of the ark, and offereth a sacrifice.
God's covenant to him.

8:1. And God remembered Noe, and all the living creatures, and all the
cattle which were with him in the ark, and brought a wind upon the
earth, and the waters were abated:

8:2. The fountains also of the deep, and the floodgates of heaven, were
shut up, and the rain from heaven was restrained.

8:3. And the waters returned from off the earth going and coming: and
they began to be abated after a hundred and fifty days.

8:4. And the ark rested in the seventh month, the seven and twentieth
day of the month, upon the mountains of Armenia.

8:5. And the waters were going and decreasing until the tenth month: for
in the tenth month, the first day of the month, the tops of the
mountains appeared.

8:6. And after that forty days were passed, Noe opening the window of
the ark, which he had made, sent forth a raven:

8:7. Which went forth and did not return, till the waters were dried up
upon the earth.

Did not return... The raven did not return into the ark; but (as it may
be gathered from the Hebrew) went to and fro; sometimes going to the
mountains, where it found carcasses to feed on: and other times
returning, to rest upon the top of the ark.

8:8. He sent forth also a dove after him, to see if the waters had now
ceased upon the face of the earth.

8:9. But she not finding where her foot might rest, returned to him into
the ark: for the waters were upon the whole earth: and he put forth his
hand, and caught her, and brought her into the ark.

8:10. And having waited yet seven other days, he again sent forth the
dove out of the ark.

8:11. And she came to him in the evening carrying a bough of an olive
tree, with green leaves, in her mouth. Noe therefore understood that the
waters were ceased upon the earth.

8:12. And he stayed yet other seven days: and he sent forth the dove,
which returned not any more unto him.

8:13. Therefore in the six hundredth and first year, the first month,
the first day of the month, the waters were lessened upon the earth, and
Noe opening the covering of the ark, looked, and saw that the face of
the earth was dried.

8:14. In the second month, the seven and twentieth day of the month, the
earth was dried.

8:15. And God spoke to Noe, saying:

8:16. Go out of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy sons and the wives of
thy sons with thee.

8:17. All living things that are with thee of all flesh, as well in
fowls as in beasts, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth,
bring out with thee, and go ye upon the earth: increase and multiply
upon it.

8:18. So Noe went out, he and his sons: his wife, and the wives of his
sons with him.

8:19. And all living things, and cattle, and creeping things that creep
upon the earth, according to their kinds went out of the ark.

8:20. And Noe built an altar unto the Lord: and taking of all cattle and
fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon the altar.

Holocausts,... or whole burnt offerings. In which the whole victim was
consumed by fire upon God's altar, and no part was reserved for the use
of priest or people.

8:21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour, and said: I will no more
curse the earth for the sake of man: for the imagination and thought of
man's heart are prone to evil from his youth: therefore I will no more
destroy every living soul as I have done.

Smelled, etc... A figurative expression, denoting that God was well
pleased with the sacrifices which his servant offered.

8:22. All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat,
summer and winter, night and day, shall not cease.

Genesis Chapter 9

God besseth Noe: forbiddeth blood, and promiseth never more to destroy
the world by water. The blessing of Sem and Japheth.

9:1. And God blessed Noe and his sons. And he said to them: Increase,
and multiply, and fill the earth.

9:2. And let the fear and dread of you be upon all the beasts of the
earth, and upon all the fowls of the air, and all that move upon the
earth: all the fishes of the sea are delivered into your hand.

9:3. And every thing that moveth, and liveth shall be meat for you: even
as the green herbs have I delivered them all to you:

9:4. Saving that flesh with blood you shall not eat.

9:5. For I will require the blood of your lives at the hand of every
beast, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man, and of his
brother, will I require the life of man.

9:6. Whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood shall be shed: for man
was made to the image of God.

9:7. But increase you and multiply, and go upon the earth and fill it.

9:8. Thus also said God to Noe, and to his sons with him:

9:9. Behold I will establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
after you:

9:10. And with every living soul that is with you, as well in all birds,
as in cattle and beasts of the earth, that are come forth out of the
ark, and in all the beasts of the earth.

9:11. I will establish my covenant with you, and all flesh shall be no
more destroyed with the waters of a flood, neither shall there be from
henceforth a flood to waste the earth.

9:12. And God said: This is the sign of the covenant which I give
between me and you, and to every living soul that is with you, for
perpetual generations.

9:13. I will set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be the sign of a
covenant between me and between the earth.

9:14. And when I shall cover the sky with clouds, my bow shall appear in
the clouds:

9:15. And I will remember my covenant with you, and with every living
soul that beareth flesh: and there shall no more be waters of a flood to
destroy all flesh.

9:16. And the bow shall be in the clouds, and I shall see it, and shall
remember the everlasting covenant, that was made between God and every
living soul of all flesh which is upon the earth.

9:17. And God said to Noe: This shall be the sign of the covenant, which
I have established, between me and all flesh upon the earth.

9:18. And the sons of Noe, who came out of the ark, were Sem, Cham, and
Japheth: and Cham is the father of Chanaan.

9:19. These three are the sons of Noe: and from these was all mankind
spread over the whole earth.

9:20. And Noe a husbandman began to till the ground, and planted a
vineyard.

9:21. And drinking of the wine was made drunk, and was uncovered in his
tent.

Drunk... Noe by the judgment of the fathers was not guilty of sin, in
being overcome by wine: because he knew not the strength of it.

9:22. Which when Cham the father of Chanaan had seen, to wit, that his
father's nakedness was uncovered, he told it to his two brethren
without.

9:23. But Sem and Japheth put a cloak upon their shoulders, and going
backward, covered the nakedness of their father: and their faces were
turned away, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

Covered the nakedness... Thus, as St. Gregory takes notice L. 35; Moral.
c. 22, we ought to cover the nakedness, that is, the sins, of our
spiritual parents and superiors.

9:24. And Noe awaking from the wine, when he had learned what his
younger son had done to him,

9:25. He said: Cursed be Chanaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto
his brethren.

Cursed be Chanaan... The curses, as well as the blessings, of the
partiarchs, were prophetical: And this in particular is here recorded by
Moses, for the children of Israel, who were to possess the land of
Chanaan. But why should Chanaan be cursed for his father's faults? The
Hebrews answer, that he being then a boy, was the first that saw his
grandfather's nakedness, and told his father Cham of it; and joined with
him in laughing at it: which drew upon him, rather than upon the rest of
the children of Cham, this prophetical curse.

9:26. And he said: Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, be Chanaan his
servant.

9:27. May God enlarge Japheth, and may he dwell in the tents of Sem, and
Chanaan be his servant.

9:28. And Noe lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29. And all his days were in the whole nine hundred and fifty years:
and he died.

Genesis Chapter 10

The genealogy of the children of Noe, by whom the world was peopled
after the flood.

10:1. These are the generations of the sons of Noe: Sem, Cham, and
Japheth: and unto them sons were born after the flood.

10:2. The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
Thubal, and Mosoch, and Thiras.

10:3. And the sons of Gomer: Ascenez and Riphath and Thogorma.

10:4. And the sons of Javan: Elisa and Tharsis, Cetthim and Dodanim.

10:5. By these were divided the islands of the Gentiles in their lands,
every one according to his tongue and their families in their nations.

The islands... So the Hebrews called all the remote countries, to which
they went by ships from Judea, to Greece, Italy, Spain, etc.

10:6. And the Sons of Cham: Chus, and Mesram, and Phuth, and Chanaan.

10:7. And the sons of Chus: Saba, and Hevila, and Sabatha, and Regma,
and Sabatacha. The sons of Regma: Saba, and Dadan.

10:8. Now Chus begot Nemrod: he began to be mighty on the earth.

10:9. And he was a stout hunter before the Lord. Hence came a proverb:
Even as Nemrod the stout hunter before the Lord.

A stout hunter... Not of beasts but of men: whom by violence and tyranny
he brought under his dominion. And such he was, not only in the opinion
of men, but before the Lord, that is, in his sight who cannot be
deceived.

10:10. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, and Arach, and
Achad, and Chalanne in the land of Sennaar.

10:11. Out of that land came forth Assur, and built Ninive, and the
streets of the city, and Chale.

10:12. Resen also between Ninive and Chale: this is the great city.

10:13. And Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim and Laabim, Nephthuim.

10:14. And Phetrusim, and Chasluim; of whom came forth the Philistines,
and the Capthorim.

10:15. And Chanaan begot Sidon his firstborn, the Hethite,

10:16. And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite, and the Gergesite.

10:17. The Hevite and Aracite: the Sinite,

10:18. And the Aradian, the Samarite, and the Hamathite: and afterwards
the families of the Chanaanites were spread abroad.

10:19. And the limits of Chanaan were from Sidon as one comes to Gerara
even to Gaza, until thou enter Sodom and Gomorrha, and Adama, and Seboim
even to Lesa.

10:20. These are the children of Cham in their kindreds and tongues, and
generations, and lands, and nations.

10:21. Of Sem also the father of all the children of Heber, the elder
brother of Japheth, sons were born.

10:22. The sons of Sem: Elam and Assur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.

10:23. The sons of Aram: Us, and Hull, and Gether; and Mes.

10:24. But Arphaxad begot Sale, of whom was born Heber.

10:25. And to Heber were born two sons: the name of the one was Phaleg,
because in his days was the earth divided: and his brother's name
Jectan.

10:26. Which Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph, and Asarmoth, Jare,

10:27. And Aduram, and Uzal, and Decla,

10:28. And Ebal, and Abimael, Saba,

10:29. And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab. All these were the sons of
Jectan.

10:30. And their dwelling was from Messa as we go on as far as Sephar, a
mountain in the east.

10:31. These are the children of Sem according to their kindreds and
tongues, and countries in their nations.

10:32. These are the families of Noe, according to their people and
nations. By these were the nations divided on the earth after the flood.

Genesis Chapter 11

The tower of Babel. The confusion of tongues. The genealogy of Sem down
to Abram.

11:1. And the earth was of one tongue, and of the same speech.

11:2. And when they removed from the east, they found a plain in the
land of Sennaar, and dwelt in it.

11:3. And each one said to his neighbour: Come let us make brick, and
bake them with fire. And they had brick instead of stones, and slime
instead of mortar:

11:4. And they said: Come, let us make a city and a tower, the top
whereof may reach to heaven; and let us make our name famous before we
be scattered abroad into all lands.

11:5. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of Adam were building.

11:6. And he said: Behold, it is one people, and all have one tongue:
and they have begun to do this, neither will they leave off from their
designs, till they accomplish them in deed.

11:7. Come ye, therefore, let us go down, and there confound their
tongue, that they may not understand one another's speech.

11:8. And so the Lord scattered them from that place into all lands, and
they ceased to build the city.

11:9. And therefore the name thereof was called Babel, because there the
language of the whole earth was confounded: and from thence the Lord
scattered them abroad upon the face of all countries.

Babel... That is, confusion.

11:10. These are the generations of Sem: Sem was a hundred years old
when he begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood.

11:11. And Sem lived after he begot Arphaxad, five hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

11:12. And Arphaxad lived thirty-five years, and begot Sale.

11:13. And Arphaxad lived after he begot Sale, three hundred and three
years, and begot sons and daughters.

11:14. Sale also lived thirty years, and begot Heber.

11:15. And Sale lived after he begot Heber, four hundred and three
years: and begot sons and daughters.

11:16. And Heber lived thirty-four years, and begot Phaleg.

11:17. And Heber lived after he begot Phaleg, four hundred and thirty
years: and begot sons and daughters.

11:18. Phaleg also lived thirty years, and begot Reu.

11:19. And Phaleg lived after he begot Reu, two hundred and nine years,
and begot sons and daughters.

11:20. And Reu lived thirty-two years, and begot Sarug.

11:21. And Reu lived after he begot Sarug, two hundred and seven years,
and begot sons and daughters.

11:22. And Sarug lived thirty years, and begot Nachor.

11:23. And Sarug lived after he begot Nachor, two hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

11:24. And Nachor lived nine and twenty years, and begot Thare.

11:25. And Nachor lived after he begot Thare, a hundred and nineteen
years, and begot sons and daughters.

11:26. And Thare lived seventy years, and begot Abram, and Nachor, and
Aran.

11:27. And these are the generations of Thare: Thare begot Abram,
Nachor, and Aran. And Aran begot Lot.

11:28. And Aran died before Thare his father, in the land of his
nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.

11:29. And Abram and Nachor married wives: the name of Abram's wife was
Sarai: and the name of Nachor's wife, Melcha, the daughter of Aran,
father of Melcha and father of Jescha.

11:30. And Sarai was barren, and had no children.

11:31. And Thare took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Aran, his son's
son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, the wife of Abram his son, and
brought them out of Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Chanaan:
and they came as far as Haran, and dwelt there.

11:32. And the days of Thare were two hundred and five years, and he
died in Haran.

Genesis Chapter 12

The call of Abram, and the promise made to him. He sojourneth in
Chanaan, and then by occasion of a famine, goeth down to Egypt.

12:1. And the Lord said to Abram: Go forth out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and out of thy father's house, and come into the land which
I shall shew thee.

12:2. And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and
magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed.

12:3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee,
and IN THEE shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

12:4. So Abram went out as the Lord had commanded him, and Lot went with
him: Abram was seventy-five years old when he went forth from Haran.

12:5. And he took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all the
substance which they had gathered, and the souls which they had gotten
in Haran: and they went out to go into the land of Chanaan. And when
they were come into it,

12:6. Abram passed through the country unto the place of Sichem, as far
as the noble vale: now the Chanaanite was at that time in the land.

12:7. And the Lord appeared to Abram, and said to him: To thy seed will
I give this land. And he built there an altar to the Lord, who had
appeared to him.

12:8. And passing on from thence to a mountain, that was on the east
side of Bethel, he there pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west,
and Hai on the east: he built there also an altar to the Lord, and
called upon his name.

12:9. And Abram went forward, going and proceeding on to the south.

12:10. And there came a famine in the country: and Abram went down into
Egypt, to sojourn there: for the famine was very grievous in the land.

12:11. And when he was near to enter into Egypt, he said to Sarai his
wife: I know that thou art a beautiful woman:

12:12. And that when the Egyptians shall see thee, they will say: She is
his wife: and they will kill me, and keep thee.

12:13. Say, therefore, I pray thee, that thou art my sister: that I may
be well used for thee, and that my soul may live for thy sake.

My sister... This was no lie; because she was his niece, being daughter
to his brother Aran, and therefore, in the style of the Hebrews, she
might truly be called his sister, as Lot is called Abram's brother, Gen.
14.14. See Gen. 20.12.

12:14. And when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman
that she was very beautiful.

12:15. And the princes told Pharao, and praised her before him: and the
woman was taken into the house of Pharao.

12:16. And they used Abram well for her sake. And he had sheep and oxen
and he-asses, and men servants, and maid servants, and she-asses, and
camels.

12:17. But the Lord scourged Pharao and his house with most grievous
stripes for Sarai, Abram's wife.

12:18. And Pharao called Abram, and said to him: What is this that thou
hast done to me? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

12:19. For what cause didst thou say, she was thy sister, that I might
take her to my wife? Now therefore there is thy wife, take her, and go
thy way.

12:20. And Pharao gave his men orders concerning Abram: and they led him
away and his wife, and all that he had.

Genesis Chapter 13

Abram and Lot part from each other. God's promise to Abram.

13:1. And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he
had, and Lot with him into the south.

13:2. And he was very rich in possession of gold and silver.

13:3. And he returned by the way, that he came, from the south to
Bethel, to the place where before he had pitched his tent between Bethel
and Hai,

13:4. In the place of the altar which he had made before, and there he
called upon the name of the Lord.

13:5. But Lot also, who was with Abram, had flocks of sheep, and herds
of beasts, and tents.

13:6. Neither was the land able to bear them, that they might dwell
together: for their substance was great, and they could not dwell
together.

13:7. Whereupon also there arose a strife between the herdsmen of Abram
and of Lot. And at that time the Chanaanite and the Pherezite dwelled in
that country.

13:8. Abram therefore said to Lot: Let there be no quarrel, I beseech
thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen: for
we are brethren.

13:9. Behold the whole land is before thee: depart from me, I pray thee:
if thou wilt go to the left hand, I will take the right: if thou choose
the right hand, I will pass to the left.

13:10. And Lot lifting up his eyes, saw all the country about the
Jordan, which was watered throughout, before the Lord destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrha, as the paradise of the Lord, and like Egypt as one comes
to Segor.

13:11. And Lot chose to himself the country about the Jordan, and he
departed from the east: and they were separated one brother from the
other.

13:12. Abram dwelt in the land of Chanaan: and Lot abode in the towns,
that were about the Jordan, and dwelt in Sodom.

13:13. And the men of Sodom were very wicked, and sinners before the
face of the Lord beyond measure.

13:14. And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him:
Lift up thy eyes, and look from the place wherein thou now art, to the
north and to the south, to the east and to the west.

13:15. All the land which thou seest, I will give to thee, and to thy
seed for ever.

13:16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: if any man be
able to number the dust of the earth, he shall be able to number thy
seed also.

13:17. Arise and walk through the land in the length, and the breadth
thereof: for I will give it to thee.

13:18. So Abram removing his tent, came, and dwelt by the vale of
Mambre, which is in Hebron: and he built there an altar to the Lord.

Genesis Chapter 14

The expedition of the four kings; the victory of Abram; he is blessed by
Melchisedech.

14:1. And it came to pass at that time, that Amraphel, king of Sennaar,
and Arioch, king of Pontus, and Chodorlahomor, king of the Elamites, and
Thadal, king of nations,

14:2. Made war against Bara, king of Sodom, and against Bersa, king of
Gomorrha, and against Sennaab, king of Adama, and against Semeber, king
of Seboim, and against the king of Bala, which is Segor.

14:3. All these came together into the woodland vale, which now is the
salt sea.

14:4. For they had served Chodorlahomor twelve years, and in the
thirteenth year they revolted from him.

14:5. And in the fourteenth year came Chodorlahomor, and the kings that
were with him: and they smote the Raphaim in Astarothcarnaim, and the
Zuzim with them, and the Emim in Save of Cariathaim.

14:6. And the Chorreans in the mountains of Seir, even to the plains of
Pharan, which is in the wilderness.

14:7. And they returned, and came to the fountain of Misphat, the same
is Cades: and they smote all the country of the Amalecites, and the
Amorrhean that dwelt in Asasonthamar.

14:8. And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha, and the king of
Adama, and the king of Seboim, and the king of Bala, which is Segor,
went out: and they set themselves against them in battle array, in the
woodland vale:

14:9. To wit, against Chodorlahomor king of the Elamites, and Thadal
king of nations, and Amraphel king of Sennaar, and Arioch king of
Pontus: four kings against five.

14:10. Now the woodland vale had many pits of slime. And the king of
Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha turned their backs, and were overthrown
there: and they that remained, fled to the mountain.

Of slime. Bituminis... This was a kind of pitch, which served for mortar
in the building of Babel, Gen. 11.3, and was used by Noe in pitching the
ark.

14:11. And they took all the substance of the Sodomites, and
Gomorrhites, and all their victuals, and went their way:

14:12. And Lot also, the son of Abram's brother, who dwelt in Sodom, and
his substance.

14:13. And behold one, that had escaped, told Abram the Hebrew, who
dwelt in the vale of Mambre the Amorrhite, the brother of Escol, and the
brother of Aner: for these had made a league with Abram.

14:14. Which when Abram had heard, to wit, that his brother Lot was
taken, he numbered of the servants born in his house, three hundred and
eighteen, well appointed: and pursued them to Dan.

14:15. And dividing his company, he rushed upon them in the night, and
defeated them: and pursued them as far as Hoba, which is on the left
hand of Damascus.

14:16. And he brought back all the substance, and Lot his brother, with
his substance, the women also, and the people.

14:17. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after he returned
from the slaughter of Chodorlahomor, and of the kings that were with him
in the vale of Save, which is the king's vale.

14:18. But Melchisedech, the king of Salem, bringing forth bread and
wine, for he was the priest of the most high God,

14:19. Blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram by the most high God, who
created heaven and earth.

14:20. And blessed be the most high God, by whose protection, the
enemies are in thy hands. And he gave him the tithes of all.

14:21. And the king of Sodom said to Abram: Give me the persons, and the
rest take to thyself.

14:22. And he answered him: I lift up my hand to the Lord God the most
high, the possessor of heaven and earth,

14:23. That from the very woof thread unto the shoe latchet, I will not
take of any things that are thine, lest thou say: I have enriched Abram.

14:24. Except such things as the young men have eaten, and the shares of
the men that came with me, Aner, Escol, and Mambre: these shall take
their shares.

Genesis Chapter 15

God promiseth seed to Abram. His faith, sacrifice and vision.

15:1. Now when these things were done, the word of the Lord came to
Abram by a vision, saying: Fear not, Abram, I am thy protector, and thy
reward exceeding great.

15:2. And Abram said: Lord God, what wilt thou give me? I shall go
without children: and the son of the steward of my house is this
Damascus Eliezer.

15:3. And Abram added: But to me thou hast not given seed: and lo my
servant born in my house, shall be my heir.

15:4. And immediately the word of the Lord came to him, saying: He
shall not be thy heir: but he that shall come out of thy bowels, him
shalt thou have for thy heir.

15:5. And he brought him forth abroad, and said to him: Look up to
heaven and number the stars if thou canst. And he said to him: So shall
thy seed be.

15:6. Abram believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

15:7. And he said to him: I am the Lord who brought thee out from Ur of
the Chaldees, to give thee this land, and that thou mightest possess it.

15:8. But he said: Lord God, whereby may I know that I shall possess it?

15:9. And the Lord answered, and said: Take me a cow of three years old,
and a she-goat of three years, and a ram of three years, a turtle also,
and a pigeon.

15:10. And he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid
the two pieces of each one against the other: but the birds he divided
not.

15:11. And the fowls came down upon the carcasses, and Abram drove them
away.

15:12. And when the sun was setting, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a
great and darksome horror seized upon him.

15:13. And it was said unto him: Know thou beforehand that thy seed
shall be a stranger in a land not their own, and they shall bring them
under bondage, and afflict them four hundred years.

15:14. But I will judge the nation which they shall serve, and after
this they shall come out with great substance.

15:15. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and be buried in a
good old age.

15:16. But in the fourth generation they shall return hither: for as yet
the iniquities of the Amorrhites are not at the full until this present
time.

15:17. And when the sun was set, there arose a dark mist, and there
appeared a smoking furnace, and a lamp of fire passing between those
divisions.

15:18. That day God made a covenant with Abram, saying: To thy seed will
I give this land, from the river to Egypt even to the great river
Euphrates.

15:19. The Cineans, and Cenezites, the Cedmonites,

15:20. And the Hethites, and the Pherezites, the Raphaim also,

15:21. And the Amorrhites, and the Chanaanites, and the Gergesites, and
the Jebusites.

Genesis Chapter 16

Abram marrieth Agar, who bringeth forth Ismael.

16:1. Now Sarai, the wife of Abram, had brought forth no children: but
having a handmaid, an Egyptian, named Agar,

16:2. She said to her husband: Behold, the Lord hath restrained me from
bearing: go in unto my handmaid, it may be I may have children of her at
least. And when he agreed to her request,

16:3. She took Agar the Egyptian her handmaid, ten years after they
first dwelt in the land of Chanaan, and gave her to her husband to wife.

To wife... Plurality of wives, though contrary to the primitive
institution of marriage, Gen. 2.24, was by divine dispensation allowed
to the patriarchs: which allowance seems to have continued during the
time of the law of Moses. But Christ our Lord reduced marriage to its
primitive institution. Matt. 19.

16:4. And he went in to her. But she perceiving that she was with child,
despised her mistress.

16:5. And Sarai said to Abram: Thou dost unjustly with me: I gave my
handmaid into thy bosom, and she perceiving herself to be with child,
despiseth me. The Lord judge between me and thee.

16:6. And Abram made answer, and said to her: Behold thy handmaid is in
thy own hand, use her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai afflicted her,
she ran away.

16:7. And the angel of the Lord having found her, by a fountain of water
in the wilderness, which is in the way to Sur in the desert,

16:8. He said to her: Agar, handmaid of Sarai, whence comest thou? and
whither goest thou? And she answered: I flee from the face of Sarai, my
mistress.

16:9. And the angel of the Lord said to her: Return to thy mistress, and
humble thyself under her hand.

16:10. And again he said: I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it
shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11. And again: Behold, said he, thou art with child, and thou shalt
bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his name Ismael, because the Lord
hath heard thy affliction.

16:12. He shall be a wild man: his hand will be against all men, and all
men's hands against him: and he shall pitch his tents over against all
his brethren.

16:13. And she called the name of the Lord that spoke unto her: Thou the
God who hast seen me. For she said: Verily, here have I seen the hinder
parts of him that seeth me.

16:14. Therefore she called that well, the well of him that liveth and
seeth me. The same is between Cades and Barad.

16:15. And Agar brought forth a son to Abram: who called his name
Ismael.

16:16. Abram was four score and six years old when Agar brought him
forth Ismael.

Genesis Chapter 17

The Covenant of circumcision.

17:1. And after he began to be ninety and nine years old, the Lord
appeared to him: and said unto him: I am the Almighty God: walk before
me, and be perfect.

17:2. And I will make my covenant between me and thee: and I will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3. Abram fell flat on his face.

17:4. And God said to him: I am, and my covenant is with thee, and thou
shalt be a father of many nations.

17:5. Neither shall thy name be called any more Abram: but thou shalt be
called Abraham: because I have made thee a father of many nations.

Abram... in the Hebrew, signifies a high father: but Abraham, the father
of the multitude; Sarai signifies my Lady, but Sara absolutely Lady.

17:6. And I will make thee increase exceedingly, and I will make nations
of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and between
thy seed after thee in their generations, by a perpetual covenant: to be
a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8. And I will give to thee, and to thy seed, the land of thy
sojournment, all the land of Chanaan, for a perpetual possession, and I
will be their God.

17:9. Again God said to Abraham: And thou therefore shalt keep my
covenant, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10. This is my covenant which you shall observe between me and you,
and thy seed after thee: All the male-kind of you shall be circumcised.

17:11. And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may
be for a sign of the covenant between me and you.

17:12. An infant of eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
manchild in your generations: he that is born in the house, as well as
the bought servant, shall be circumcised, and whosoever is not of your
stock:

17:13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for a perpetual covenant.

17:14. The male whose flesh of his foreskin shall not be circumcised,
that soul shall be destroyed out of his people: because he hath broken
my covenant.

17:15. God said also to Abraham: Sarai thy wife thou shalt not call
Sarai, but Sara.

17:16. And I will bless her, and of her I will give thee a son, whom I
will bless, and he shall become nations, and kings of people shall
spring from him.

17:17. Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, saying in his heart:
Shall a son, thinkest thou, be born to him that is a hundred years old?
and shall Sara that is ninety years old bring forth?

17:18. And he said to God: O that Ismael may live before thee.

17:19. And God said to Abraham: Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son, and
thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant with
him for a perpetual covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20. And as for Ismael I have also heard thee. Behold, I will bless
him, and increase, and multiply him exceedingly: he shall beget twelve
chiefs, and I will make him a great nation.

17:21. But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sara shall
bring forth to thee at this time in the next year.

17:22. And when he had left off speaking with him, God went up from
Abraham.

17:23. And Abraham took Ismael his son, and all that were born in his
house: and all whom he had bought, every male among the men of his
house: and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin forthwith the very
same day, as God had commanded him.

17:24. Abraham was ninety and nine years old, when he circumcised the
flesh of his foreskin.

17:25. And Ismael his son was full thirteen years old at the time of his
circumcision.

17:26. The selfsame day was Abraham circumcised and Ismael his son.

17:27. And all the men of his house, as well they that were born in his
house, as the bought servants and strangers, were circumcised with him.

Genesis Chapter 18

Angels are entertained by Abraham. They foretell the birth of Isaac.
Abraham's prayer for the men of Sodom.

18:1. And the Lord appeared to him in the vale of Mambre as he was
sitting at the door of his tent, in the very heat of the day.

18:2. And when he had lifted up his eyes, there appeared to him three
men standing near to him: and as soon as he saw them, he ran to meet
them from the door of his tent, and adored down to the ground.

18:3. And he said: Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, pass not
away from thy servant.

18:4. But I will fetch a little water, and wash ye your feet, and rest
ye under the tree.

18:5. And I will set a morsel of bread, and strengthen ye your heart,
afterwards you shall pass on: for therefore are you come aside to your
servant. And they said: Do as thou hast spoken.

18:6. Abraham made haste into the tent to Sara, and said to her: Make
haste, temper together three measures of flour, and make cakes upon the
hearth.

18:7. And he himself ran to the herd, and took from thence a calf, very
tender and very good, and gave it to a young man, who made haste and
boiled it.

18:8. He took also butter and milk, and the calf which he had boiled,
and set before them: but he stood by them under the tree.

18:9. And when they had eaten, they said to him: Where is Sara thy wife?
He answered: Lo she is in the tent.

18:10. And he said to him: I will return and come to thee at this time,
life accompanying, and Sara, thy wife, shall have a son. Which when Sara
heard, she laughed behind the door of the tent.

18:11. Now they were both old, and far advanced in years, and it had
ceased to be with Sara after the manner of women.

18:12. And she laughed secretly, saying: After I am grown old, and my
lord is an old man, shall I give myself to pleasure?

18:13. And the Lord said to Abraham: Why did Sara laugh, saying: Shall
I, who am an old woman, bear a child indeed?

18:14. Is there any thing hard to God? According to appointment I will
return to thee at this same time, life accompanying, and Sara shall have
a son.

18:15. Sara denied, saying: I did not laugh: for she was afraid. But the
Lord said: Nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16. And when the men rose up from thence, they turned their eyes
towards Sodom: and Abraham walked with them, bringing them on the way.

18:17. And the Lord said: Can I hide from Abraham what I am about to do:

18:18. Seeing he shall become a great and mighty nation, and in him all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed?

18:19. For I know that he will command his children, and his household
after him, to keep the way of the Lord, and do judgment and justice:
that for Abraham's sake, the Lord may bring to effect all the things he
hath spoken unto him.

18:20. And the Lord said: The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is multiplied,
and their sin is become exceedingly grievous.

18:21. I will go down and see whether they have done according to the
cry that is come to me; or whether it be not so, that I may know.

I will go down, etc... The Lord here accommodates his discourse to the
way of speaking and acting amongst men; for he knoweth all things, and
needeth not to go anywhere for information. Note here, that two of the
three angels went away immediately for Sodom; whilst the third, who
represented the Lord, remained with Abraham.

18:22. And they turned themselves from thence, and went their way to
Sodom: but Abraham as yet stood before the Lord.

18:23. And drawing nigh, he said: Wilt thou destroy the just with the
wicked?

18:24. If there be fifty just men in the city, shall they perish withal?
and wilt thou not spare that place for the sake of the fifty just, if
they be therein?

18:25. Far be it from thee to do this thing, and to slay the just with
the wicked, and for the just to be in like case as the wicked; this is
not beseeming thee: thou who judgest all the earth, wilt not make this
judgment.

18:26. And the Lord said to him: If I find in Sodom fifty just within
the city, I will spare the whole place for their sake.

18:27. And Abraham answered, and said: Seeing I have once begun, I will
speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes.

18:28. What if there be five less than fifty just persons? wilt thou for
five and forty destroy the whole city: And he said: I will not destroy
it, if I find five and forty.

18:29. And again he said to him: But if forty be found there, what wilt
thou do? He said: I will not destroy it for the sake of forty.

18:30. Lord, saith he, be not angry, I beseech thee, if I speak: What if
thirty shall be found there? He answered: I will not do it, if I find
thirty there.

18:31. Seeing, saith he, I have once begun, I will speak to my Lord:
What if twenty be found there? He said: I will not destroy it for the
sake of twenty.

18:32. I beseech thee, saith he, be not angry, Lord, if I speak yet once
more: What if ten shall be found there? And he said: I will not destroy
it for the sake of ten.

18:33. And the Lord departed, after he had left speaking to Abraham: and
Abraham returned to his place.

Genesis Chapter 19

Lot, entertaining Angels in his house, is delivered from Sodom, which is
destroyed: his wife for looking back is turned into a statue of salt.

19:1. And the two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was
sitting in the gate of the city. And seeing them, he rose up and went to
meet them: and worshipped prostrate to the ground.

19:2. And said: I beseech you, my lords, turn in to the house of your
servant, and lodge there: wash your feet, and in the morning you shall
go on your way. And they said: No, but we will abide in the street.

19:3. He pressed them very much to turn in unto him: and when they were
come into his house, he made them a feast, and baked unleavened bread,
and they ate:

19:4. But before they went to bed, the men of the city beset the house,
both young and old, all the people together.

19:5. And they called Lot, and said to him: Where are the men that came
in to thee at night? bring them out hither, that we may know them:

19:6. Lot went out to them, and shut the door after him, and said:

19:7. Do not so, I beseech you, my brethren, do not commit this evil.

19:8. I have two daughters who, as yet, have not known man; I will bring
them out to you, and abuse you them as it shall please you, so that you
do no evil to these men, because they are come in under the shadow of my
roof.

19:9. But they said: Get thee back thither. And again: Thou camest in,
said they, as a stranger, was it to be a judge? therefore we will
afflict thee more than them. And they pressed very violently upon Lot:
and they were even at the point of breaking open the doors.

19:10. And behold the men put out their hand, and drew in Lot unto them,
and shut the door.

19:11. And them, that were without, they struck with blindness from the
least to the greatest, so that they could not find the door.

19:12. And they said to Lot: Hast thou here any of thine? son-in-law, or
sons, or daughters, all that are thine bring them out of this city:

19:13. For we will destroy this place, because their cry is grown loud
before the Lord, who hath sent us to destroy them.

19:14. So Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law that were to have
his daughters, and said: Arise: get you out of this place, because the
Lord will destroy this city. And he seemed to them to speak as it were
in jest.

19:15. And when it was morning, the angels pressed him, saying: Arise,
take thy wife, and the two daughters that thou hast: lest thou also
perish in the wickedness of the city.

19:16. And as he lingered, they took his hand, and the hand of his wife,
and of his two daughters, because the Lord spared him.

19:17. And they brought him forth, and set him without the city: and
there they spoke to him, saying: Save thy life: look not back, neither
stay thou in all the country about: but save thy self in the mountain,
lest thou be also consumed.

19:18. And Lot said to them: I beseech thee, my Lord,

19:19. Because thy servant hath found grace before thee, and thou hast
magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewn to me, in saving my life, and
I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil seize me, and I die.

19:20. There is this city here at hand, to which I may flee, it is a
little one, and I shall be saved in it: is it not a little one, and my
soul shall live?

19:21. And he said to him: Behold also in this, I have heard thy
prayers, not to destroy the city for which thou hast spoken.

19:22. Make haste, and be saved there: because I cannot do any thing
till thou go in thither. Therefore the name of that city was called
Segor.

Segor... That is, a little one.

19:23. The sun was risen upon the earth, and Lot entered into Segor.

19:24. And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of heaven.

19:25. And he destroyed these cities, and all the country about, all the
inhabitants of the cities, and all things that spring from the earth.

19:26. And his wife looking behind her, was turned into a statue of
salt.

And his wife... As a standing memorial to the servants of God to proceed
in virtue, and not to look back to vice or its allurements.

19:27. And Abraham got up early in the morning, and in the place where
he had stood before with the Lord:

19:28. He looked towards Sodom and Gomorrha, and the whole land of that
country: and he saw the ashes rise up from the earth as the smoke of a
furnace.

19:29. Now when God destroyed the cities of that country, remembering
Abraham, he delivered Lot out of the destruction of the cities wherein
he had dwelt.

19:30. And Lot went up out of Segor, and abode in the mountain, and his
two daughters with him (for he was afraid to stay in Segor) and he dwelt
in a cave, he and his two daughters with him.

19:31. And the elder said to the younger: Our father is old, and there
is no man left on the earth, to come in unto us after the manner of the
whole earth.

19:32. Come, let us make him drunk with wine, and let us lie with him,
that we may preserve seed of our father.

19:33. And they made their father drink wine that night: and the elder
went in, and lay with her father: but he perceived not, neither when his
daughter lay down, nor when she rose up.

19:34. And the next day the elder said to the younger: Behold I lay last
night with my father, let us make him drink wine also to night, and thou
shalt lie with him, that we may save seed of our father.

19:35. They made their father drink wine that night also, and the
younger daughter went in, and lay with him: and neither then did he
perceive when she lay down, nor when she rose up.

19:36. So the two daughters of Lot were with child by their father.

19:37. And the elder bore a son, and she called his name Moab: he is the
father of the Moabites unto this day.

19:38. The younger also bore a son, and she called his name Ammon; that
is, the son of my people: he is the father of the Ammonites unto this
day.

Genesis Chapter 20

Abraham sojourned in Gerara: Sara is taken into king Abimelech's house,
but by God's commandment is restored untouched.

20:1. Abraham removed from thence to the south country, and dwelt
between Cades and Sur, and sojourned in Gerara.

20:2. And he said of Sara his wife: She is my sister. So Abimelech the
king of Gerara sent, and took her.

20:3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and he said to him:
Lo thou shalt die for the woman that thou hast taken: for she hath a
husband.

20:4. Now Abimelech had not touched her, and he said: Lord, wilt thou
slay a nation that is ignorant and just?

20:5. Did not he say to me: She is my sister: and she say, He is my
brother? in the simplicity of my heart, and cleanness of my hands have I
done this.

20:6. And God said to him: And I know that thou didst it with a sincere
heart: and therefore I withheld thee from sinning against me, and I
suffered thee not to touch her.

20:7. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet: and
he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: but if thou wilt not
restore her, know that thou shalt surely die, thou and all that are
thine.

20:8. And Abimelech forthwith rising up in the night, called all his
servants: and spoke all these words in their hearing, and all the men
were exceedingly afraid.

20:9. And Abimelech called also for Abraham, and said to him: What hast
thou done to us? what have we offended thee in, that thou hast brought
upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done to us what thou
oughtest not to do.

20:10. And again he expostulated with him, and said: What sawest thou,
that thou hast done this?

20:11. Abraham answered: I thought with myself, saying: Perhaps there is
not the fear of God in this place: and they will kill me for the sake of
my wife:

20:12. Howbeit, otherwise also she is truly my sister, the daughter of
my father, and not the daughter of my mother, and I took her to wife.

20:13. And after God brought me out of my father's house, I said to her:
Thou shalt do me this kindness: In every place, to which we shall come,
thou shalt say that I am thy brother.

20:14. And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and servants and handmaids,
and gave to Abraham: and restored to him Sara his wife,

20:15. And said: The land is before you, dwell wheresoever it shall
please thee.

20:16. And to Sara he said: Behold I have given thy brother a thousand
pieces of silver, this shall serve thee for a covering of thy eyes to
all that are with thee, and whithersoever thou shalt go: and remember
thou wast taken.

20:17. And when Abraham prayed, God healed Abimelech and his wife, and
his handmaids, and they bore children:

20:18. For the Lord had closed up every womb of the house of Abimelech,
on account of Sara, Abraham's wife.

Genesis Chapter 21

Isaac is born. Agar and Ismael are cast forth.

21:1. And the Lord visited Sara, as he had promised: and fulfilled what
he had spoken.

21:2. And she conceived and bore a son in her old age, at the time that
God had foretold her.

21:3. And Abraham called the name of his son, whom Sara bore him, Isaac.

Isaac... This word signifies laughter.

21:4. And he circumcised him the eighth day, as God had commanded him,

21:5. When he was a hundred years old: for at this age of his father,
was Isaac born.

21:6. And Sara said: God hath made a laughter for me: whosoever shall
hear of it will laugh with me.

21:7. And again she said: Who would believe that Abraham should hear
that Sara gave suck to a son, whom she bore to him in his old age?

21:8. And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast
on the day of his weaning.

21:9. And when Sara had seen the son of Agar, the Egyptian, playing with
Isaac, her son, she said to Abraham:

21:10. Cast out this bondwoman and her son; for the son of the bondwoman
shall not be heir with my son Isaac.

21:11. Abraham took this grievously for his son.

21:12. And God said to him: Let it not seem grievous to thee for the
boy, and for thy bondwoman: in all that Sara hath said to thee, hearken
to her voice: for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

21:13. But I will make the son also of the bondwoman a great nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14. So Abraham rose up in the morning, and taking bread and a bottle
of water, put it upon her shoulder, and delivered the boy, and sent her
away. And she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Bersabee.

21:15. And when the water in the bottle was spent, she cast the boy
under one of the trees that were there.

21:16. And she went her way, and sat over against him a great way off, as
far as a bow can carry, for she said: I will not see the boy die: and
sitting over against, she lifted up her voice and wept.

21:17. And God heard the voice of the boy: and an angel of God called to
Agar from heaven, saying: What art thou doing, Agar? fear not; for God
hath heard the voice of the boy, from the place wherein he is.

21:18. Arise, take up the boy, and hold him by the hand, for I will make
him a great nation.

21:19. And God opened her eyes: and she saw a well of water, and went
and filled the bottle, and gave the boy to drink.

21:20. And God was with him: and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness,
and became a young man, an archer.

21:21. And he dwelt in the wilderness of Pharan, and his mother took a
wife for him out of the land of Egypt.

21:22. At the same time Abimelech, and Phicol the general of his army,
said to Abraham: God is with thee in all that thou dost.

21:23. Swear therefore by God, that thou wilt not hurt me, nor my
posterity, nor my stock: but according to the kindness that I have done
to thee, thou shalt do to me, and to the land wherein thou hast lived a
stranger.

21:24. And Abraham said: I will swear.

21:25. And he reproved Abimelech for a well of water, which his servants
had taken away by force.

21:26. And Abimelech answered: I knew not who did this thing: and thou
didst not tell me, and I heard not of it till today.

21:27. Then Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech: and
both of them made a league.

21:28. And Abraham set apart seven ewelambs of the flock.

21:29. And Abimelech said to him: What mean these seven ewelambs which
thou hast set apart?

21:30. But he said: Thou shalt take seven ewelambs at my hand: that they
may be a testimony for me, that I dug this well.

21:31. Therefore that place was called Bersabee; because there both of
them did swear.

Bersabee... That is, the well of oath.

21:32. And they made a league for the well of oath.

21:33. And Abimelech and Phicol, the general of his army, arose and
returned to the land of the Palestines. But Abraham planted a grove in
Bersabee, and there called upon the name of the Lord God eternal.

21:34. And he was a sojourner in the land of the Palestines many days.

Genesis Chapter 22

The faith and obedience of Abraham is proved in his readiness to
sacrifice his son Isaac. He is stayed from the act by an angel. Former
promises are renewed to him. His brother Nachor's issue.

22:1. After these things, God tempted Abraham, and said to him: Abraham,
Abraham. And he answered: Here I am.

God tempted, etc... God tempteth no man to evil, James 1.13; but by
trial and experiment maketh known to the world, and to ourselves, what
we are, as here by this trial the singular faith and obedience of
Abraham was made manifest.

22:2. He said to him: Take thy only begotten son Isaac, whom thou
lovest, and go into the land of vision; and there thou shalt offer him
for an holocaust upon one of the mountains which I will shew thee.

22:3. So Abraham rising up in the night, saddled his ass, and took with
him two young men, and Isaac his son: and when he had cut wood for the
holocaust, he went his way to the place which God had commanded him.

22:4. And on the third day, lifting up his eyes, he saw the place afar
off.

22:5. And he said to his young men: Stay you here with the ass; I and
the boy will go with speed as far as yonder, and after we have
worshipped, will return to you.

22:6. And he took the wood for the holocaust, and laid it upon Isaac his
son; and he himself carried in his hands fire and a sword. And as they
two went on together,

22:7. Isaac said to his father: My father. And he answered: What wilt
thou, son? Behold, saith he, fire and wood: where is the victim for the
holocaust?

22:8. And Abraham said: God will provide himself a victim for an
holocaust, my son. So they went on together.

22:9. And they came to the place which God had shewn him, where he built
an altar, and laid the wood in order upon it; and when he had bound
Isaac his son, he laid him on the altar upon the pile of wood.

22:10. And he put forth his hand, and took the sword, to sacrifice his
son.

22:11. And behold, an angel of the Lord from heaven called to him,
saying: Abraham, Abraham. And he answered: Here I am.

22:12. And he said to him: Lay not thy hand upon the boy, neither do
thou any thing to him: now I know that thou fearest God, and hast not
spared thy only begotten son for my sake.

22:13. Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw behind his back a ram,
amongst the briers, sticking fast by the horns, which he took and
offered for a holocaust instead of his son.

22:14. And he called the name of that place, The Lord seeth. Whereupon,
even to this day, it is said: In the mountain the Lord will see.

22:15. And the angel of the Lord called to Abraham a second time from
heaven, saying:

22:16. By my own self have I sworn, saith the Lord: because thou hast
done this thing, and hast not spared thy only begotten son for my sake:

22:17. I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the stars of
heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore; thy seed shall possess
the gates of their enemies.

22:18. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
because thou hast obeyed my voice.

22:19. Abraham returned to his young men, and they went to Bersabee
together, and he dwelt there.

22:20. After these things, it was told Abraham, that Melcha also had
borne children to Nachor his brother.

22:21. Hus, the firstborn, and Buz, his brother, and Camuel the father
of the Syrians,

22:22. And Cased, and Azau, and Pheldas, and Jedlaph,

22:23. And Bathuel, of whom was born Rebecca: these eight did Melcha
bear to Nachor, Abraham's brother.

22:24. And his concubine, named Roma, bore Tabee, and Gaham, and Tahas,
and Maacha.

Genesis Chapter 23

Sara's death and burial in the field bought of Ephron.

23:1. And Sara lived a hundred and twenty-seven years.

23:2. And she died in the city of Arbee which is Hebron, in the land of
Chanaan: and Abraham came to mourn and weep for her.

23:3. And after he rose up from the funeral obsequies, he spoke to the
children of Heth, saying:

23:4. I am a stranger and sojourner among you: give me the right of a
burying place with you, that I may bury my dead.

23:5. The children of Heth answered, saying:

23:6. My lord, hear us, thou art a prince of God among us: bury thy dead
in our principal sepulchres: and no man shall have power to hinder thee
from burying thy dead in his sepulchre.

23:7. Abraham rose up, and bowed down to the people of the land, to wit,
the children of Heth:

Bowed down to the people... Adoravit, literally adored. But this word
here, as well as in many other places in the Latin scriptures, is used
to signify only an inferior honour and reverence paid to men, expressed
by a bowing down of the body.

23:8. And said to them: If it please your soul that I should bury my
dead, hear me, and intercede for me to Ephron the son of Seor.

23:9. That he may give me the double cave, which he hath in the end of
his field: For as much money as it is worth he shall give it me before
you, for a possession of a burying place.

23:10. Now Ephron dwelt in the midst of the children of Heth. And Ephron
made answer to Abraham in the hearing of all that went in at the gate of
the city, saying:

23:11. Let it not be so, my lord, but do thou rather hearken to what I
say: The field I deliver to thee, and the cave that is therein; in the
presence of the children of my people, bury thy dead.

23:12. Abraham bowed down before the people of the land.

23:13. And he spoke to Ephron, in the presence of the people: I beseech
thee to hear me: I will give money for the field; take it, and so will I
bury my dead in it.

23:14. And Ephron answered:

23:15. My lord, hear me. The ground which thou desirest, is worth four
hundred sicles of silver: this is the price between me and thee: but
what is this? bury thy dead.

23:16. And when Abraham had heard this, he weighed out the money that
Ephron had asked, in the hearing of the children of Heth, four hundred
sicles of silver, of common current money.

23:17. And the field that before was Ephron's, wherein was the double
cave, looking towards Mambre, both it and the cave, and all the trees
thereof, in all its limits round about,

23:18. Was made sure to Abraham for a possession, in the sight of the
children of Heth, and of all that went in at the gate of his city.

23:19. And so Abraham buried Sara, his wife, in the double cave of the
field, that looked towards Mambre, this is Hebron in the land of
Chanaan.

23:20. And the field was made sure to Abraham, and the cave that was in
it, for a possession to bury in, by the children of Heth.

Genesis Chapter 24

Abraham's servant, sent by him into Mesopotamia, bringeth from thence
Rebecca, who is married to Isaac.

24:1. Now Abraham was old, and advanced in age; and the Lord had blessed
him in all things.

24:2. And he said to the elder servant of his house, who was ruler over
all he had: Put thy hand under my thigh,

24:3. That I may make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and
earth, that thou take not a wife for my son, of the daughters of the
Chanaanites, among whom I dwell:

24:4. But that thou go to my own country and kindred, and take a wife
from thence for my son Isaac.

24:5. The servant answered: If the woman will not come with me into this
land, must I bring thy son back again to the place from whence thou
camest out?

24:6. And Abraham said: Beware thou never bring my son back again
thither.

24:7. The Lord God of heaven, who took me out of my father's house, and
out of my native country, who spoke to me, and swore to me, saying: To
thy seed will I give this land: he will send his angel before thee, and
thou shalt take from thence a wife for my son.

He will send his angel before thee... This shows that the Hebrews
believed that God gave them guardian angels for their protection.

24:8. But if the woman will not follow thee, thou shalt not be bound by
the oath: only bring not my son back thither again.

24:9. The servant, therefore, put his hand under the thigh of Abraham,
his lord, and swore to him upon his word.

24:10. And he took ten camels of his master's herd, and departed,
carrying something of all his goods with him, and he set forward and
went on to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nachor.

24:11. And when he had made the camels lie down without the town, near a
well of water, in the evening, at the time when women are wont to come
out to draw water, he said:

24:12. O Lord, the God of my master, Abraham, meet me today, I beseech
thee, and shew kindness to my master, Abraham.

24:13. Behold, I stand nigh the spring of water, and the daughters of
the inhabitants of this city will come out to draw water:

24:14. Now, therefore, the maid to whom I shall say: Let down thy
pitcher that I may drink: and she shall answer, Drink, and I will give
thy camels drink also: let it be the same whom thou hast provided for
thy servant Isaac: and by this, I shall understand that thou hast shewn
kindness to my master.

24:15. He had not yet ended these words within himself, and behold
Rebecca came out, the daughter of Bathuel, son of Melcha, wife to Nachor
the brother of Abraham, having a pitcher on her shoulder:

24:16. An exceeding comely maid, and a most beautiful virgin, and not
known to man: and she went down to the spring, and filled her pitcher,
and was coming back.

24:17. And the servant ran to meet her, and said: Give me a little water
to drink of thy pitcher.

24:18. And she answered: Drink, my lord. And quickly she let down the
pitcher upon her arm, and gave him drink.

24:19. And when he had drunk, she said: I will draw water for thy camels
also, till they all drink.

24:20. And pouring out the pitcher into the troughs, she ran back to the
well to draw water; and having drawn, she gave to all the camels.

24:21. But he musing, beheld her with silence, desirous to know whether
the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not.

24:22. And after that the camels had drunk, the man took out golden
earrings, weighing two sicles; and as many bracelets, of ten sicles
weight.

24:23. And he said to her: Whose daughter art thou? tell me: is there
any place in thy father's house to lodge?

24:24. And she answered: I am the daughter of Bathuel, the son of
Melcha, whom she bore to Nachor.

24:25. And she said, moreover, to him: We have good store of both straw
and hay, and a large place to lodge in.

24:26. The man bowed himself down, and adored the Lord,

24:27. Saying: Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath
not taken away his mercy and truth from my master, and hath brought me
the straight way into the house of my master's brother.

24:28. Then the maid ran, and told in her mother's house all that she
had heard.

24:29. And Rebecca had a brother, named Laban, who went out in haste to
the man, to the well.

24:30. And when he had seen the earrings and bracelets in his sister's
hands, and had heard all that she related, saying, Thus and thus the man
spoke to me: he came to the man who stood by the camels, and near to the
spring of water,

24:31. And said to him: Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; why standest
thou without? I have prepared the house, and a place for the camels.

24:32. And he brought him into his lodging; and he unharnessed the
camels, and gave straw and hay, and water to wash his feet, and the feet
of the men that were come with him.

24:33. And bread was set before him. But he said: I will not eat, till I
tell my message. He answered him: Speak.

24:34. And he said: I am the servant of Abraham:

24:35. And the Lord hath blessed my master wonderfully, and he is become
great: and he hath given him sheep and oxen, silver and gold, men
servants and women servants, camels and asses.

24:36. And Sara, my master's wife, hath borne my master a son in her old
age, and he hath given him all that he had.

24:37. And my master made me swear, saying: Thou shalt not take a wife
for my son of the Chanaanites, in whose land I dwell:

24:38. But thou shalt go to my father's house, and shalt take a wife of
my own kindred for my son:

24:39. But I answered my master: What if the woman will not come with
me?

24:40. The Lord, said he, in whose sight I walk, will send his angel
with thee, and will direct thy way: and thou shalt take a wife for my
son of my own kindred, and of my father's house.

24:41. But thou shalt be clear from my curse, when thou shalt come to my
kindred, if they will not give thee one.

24:42. And I came today to the well of water, and said: O Lord God of my
master, Abraham, if thou hast prospered my way, wherein I now walk,

24:43. Behold, I stand by the well of water, and the virgin, that shall
come out to draw water, who shall hear me say: Give me a little water to
drink of thy pitcher:

24:44. And shall say to me: Both drink thou, and I will also draw for
thy camels: let the same be the woman, whom the Lord hath prepared for
my master's son.

24:45. And whilst I pondered these things secretly with myself, Rebecca
appeared, coming with a pitcher, which she carried on her shoulder: and
she went down to the well and drew water. And I said to her: Give me a
little to drink.

24:46. And she speedily let down the pitcher from her shoulder, and said
to me: Both drink thou, and to thy camels I will give drink. I drank,
and she watered the camels.

24:47. And I asked her, and said: Whose daughter art thou? And she
answered: I am the daughter of Bathuel, the son of Nachor, whom Melcha
bore to him. So I put earrings on her to adorn her face, and I put
bracelets on her hands.

24:48. And falling down, I adored the Lord, blessing the Lord God of my
master, Abraham, who hath brought me the straight way to take the
daughter of my master's brother for his son.

24:49. Wherefore, if you do according to mercy and truth with my master,
tell me: but if it please you otherwise, tell me that also, that I may
go to the right hand, or to the left.

24:50. And Laban and Bathuel answered: The word hath proceeded from the
Lord: we cannot speak any other thing to thee but his pleasure.

24:51. Behold, Rebecca is before thee, take her and go thy way, and let
her be the wife of thy master's son, as the Lord hath spoken.

24:52. Which when Abraham's servant heard, falling down to the ground,
he adored the Lord.

24:53. And bringing forth vessels of silver and gold, and garments, he
gave them to Rebecca, for a present. He offered gifts also to her
brothers, and to her mother.

24:54. And a banquet was made, and they ate and drank together, and
lodged there. And in the morning, the servant arose, and said: Let me
depart, that I may go to my master.

24:55. And her brother and mother answered: Let the maid stay, at least,
ten days with us, and afterwards she shall depart.

24:56. Stay me not, said he, because the Lord hath prospered my way:
send me away, that I may go to my master.

24:57. And they said: Let us call the maid, and ask her will.

Let us call the maid, and ask her will... Not as to her marriage, as she
had already consented, but of her quitting her parents and going to her
husband.

24:58. And they called her, and when she was come, they asked: Wilt thou
go with this man? She said: I will go.

24:59. So they sent her away, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and
his company.

24:60. Wishing prosperity to their sister, and saying: Thou art our
sister, mayst thou increase to thousands of thousands; and may thy seed
possess the gates of their enemies.

24:61. So Rebecca and her maids, being set upon camels, followed the
man: who with speed returned to his master.

24:62. At the same time, Isaac was walking along the way to the well
which is called Of the living and the seeing: for he dwelt in the south
country:

24:63. And he was gone forth to meditate in the field, the day being now
well spent: and when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw camels coming
afar off.

24:64. Rebecca also, when she saw Isaac, lighted off the camel,

24:65. And said to the servant: Who is that man who cometh towards us
along the field? And he said to her: That man is my master. But she
quickly took her cloak, and covered herself.

24:66. And the servant told Isaac all that he had done.

24:67. Who brought her into the tent of Sara his mother, and took her to
wife: and he loved her so much, that it moderated the sorrow which was
occasioned by his mother's death.

Genesis Chapter 25

Abraham's children by Cetura; his death and that of Ismael. Isaac hath
Esau and Jacob twins. Esau selleth his first birthright to Jacob.

25:1. And Abraham married another wife named Cetura:

25:2. Who bore him Zamram, and Jecsan, and Madan, and Madian, and
Jesboc, and Sue.

25:3. Jecsan also begot Saba, and Dadan. The children of Dadan were
Assurim, and Latusim, and Loomim.

25:4. But of Madian was born Epha, and Opher, and Henoch, and Abida, and
Eldaa: all these were the children of Cetura.

25:5. And Abraham gave all his possessions to Isaac:

25:6. And to the children of the concubines he gave gifts, and separated
them from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, to the east country.

Concubines... Agar and Cetura are here called concubines, (though they
were lawful wives, and in other places are so called,) because they were
of an inferior degree, and such in scripture are usually called
concubines.

25:7. And the days of Abraham's life were a hundred and seventy-five
years.

25:8. And decaying he died in a good old age, and having lived a long
time, and being full of days: and was gathered to his people.

25:9. And Isaac and Ismael his sons buried him in the double cave, which
was situated in the field of Ephron the son of Seor the Hethite, over
against Mambre,

25:10. Which he had bought of the children of Heth: there was he buried,
and Sara his wife.

25:11. And after his death, God blessed Isaac his son, who dwelt by the
well named Of the living and seeing.

25:12. These are the generations of Ismael the son of Abraham, whom Agar
the Egyptian, Sara's servant, bore unto him:

25:13. And these are the names of his children according to their
calling and generations. The firstborn of Ismael was Nabajoth, then
Cedar, and Adbeel, and Mabsam,

25:14. And Masma, and Duma, and Massa,

25:15. Hadar, and Thema, and Jethur, and Naphis, and Cedma.

25:16. These are the sons of Ismael: and these are their names by their
castles and towns, twelve princes of their tribes.

25:17. And the years of Ismael's life were a hundred and thirty-seven,
and decaying he died, and was gathered unto his people.

25:18. And he dwelt from Hevila as far as Sur, which looketh towards
Egypt, to them that go towards the Assyrians. He died in the presence of
all his brethren.

25:19. These also are the generations of Isaac the son of Abraham:
Abraham begot Isaac:

25:20. Who when he was forty years old, took to wife Rebecca the
daughter of Bathuel the Syrian of Mesopotamia, sister to Laban.

25:21. And Isaac besought the Lord for his wife, because she was barren:
and he heard him, and made Rebecca to conceive.

25:22. But the children struggled in her womb, and she said: If it were
to be so with me, what need was there to conceive? And she went to
consult the Lord.

25:23. And he answering, said: Two nations are in thy womb, and two
peoples shall be divided out of thy womb, and one people shall overcome
the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.

25:24. And when her time was come to be delivered, behold twins were
found in her womb.

25:25. He that came forth first was red, and hairy like a skin: and his
name was called Esau. Immediately the other coming forth, held his
brother's foot in his hand: and therefore he was called Jacob.

25:26. Isaac was threescore years old when the children were born unto
him.

25:27. And when they were grown up, Esau became a skilful hunter, and a
husbandman: but Jacob, a plain man, dwelt in tents.

25:28. Isaac loved Esau, because he ate of his hunting: and Rebecca
loved Jacob.

25:29. And Jacob boiled pottage: to whom Esau, coming faint out of the
field,

25:30. Said: Give me of this red pottage, for I am exceeding faint. For
which reason his name was called Edom.

25:31. And Jacob said to him: Sell me thy first birthright.

25:32. He answered: Lo I die, what will the first birthright avail me?

25:33. Jacob said: Swear therefore to me. Esau swore to him, and sold
his first birthright.

25:34. And so taking bread and the pottage of lentils, he ate, and
drank, and went on his way; making little account of having sold his
first birthright.

Genesis Chapter 26

Isaac sojourneth in Gerara, where God reneweth to him the promise made
to Abraham. King Abimelech maketh league with him.

26:1. And when a famine came in the land, after that barrenness which
had happened in the days of Abraham, Isaac went to Abimelech, king of
the Palestines, to Gerara.

26:2. And the Lord appeared to him, and said: Go not down into Egypt,
but stay in the land that I shall tell thee.

26:3. And sojourn in it, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee:
for to thee and to thy seed I will give all these countries, to fulfil
the oath which I swore to Abraham thy father.

26:4. And I will multiply thy seed like the stars of heaven: and I will
give to thy posterity all these countries: and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.

26:5. Because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts and
commandments, and observed my ceremonies and laws.

26:6. So Isaac abode in Gerara.

26:7. And when he was asked by the men of that place, concerning his
wife, he answered: She is my sister: for he was afraid to confess that
she was his wife, thinking lest perhaps they would kill him because of
her beauty.

26:8. And when very many days were passed, and he abode there,
Abimelech, king of the Palestines, looking out through a window, saw him
playing with Rebecca, his wife.

26:9. And calling for him, he said: It is evident she is thy wife: why
didst thou feign her to be thy sister? He answered: I feared lest I
should die for her sake.

26:10. And Abimelech said: Why hast thou deceived us? Some man of the
people might have lain with thy wife, and thou hadst brought upon us a
great sin. And he commanded all the people, saying:

26:11. He that shall touch this man's wife, shall surely be put to
death.

26:12. And Isaac sowed in that land, and he found that same year a
hundredfold: and the Lord blessed him.

26:13. And the man was enriched, and he went on prospering and
increasing, till he became exceeding great.

26:14. And he had possessions of sheep and of herds, and a very great
family. Wherefore the Palestines envying him,

26:15. Stopped up at that time all the wells, that the servants of his
father, Abraham, had digged, filling them up with earth:

26:16. Insomuch that Abimelech himself said to Isaac: Depart from us,
for thou art become much mightier than we.

26:17. So he departed, and came to the torrent of Gerara, to dwell
there:

26:18. And he digged again other wells, which the servants of his
father, Abraham, had digged, and which, after his death, the Philistines
had of old stopped up: and he called them by the same names, by which
his father before had called them.

26:19. And they digged in the torrent, and found living water:

Torrent... That is, a channel where sometimes a torrent or violent
stream had run.

26:20. But there also the herdsmen of Gerara strove against the herdsmen
of Isaac, saying: It is our water. Wherefore he called the name of the
well, on occasion of that which had happened, Calumny.

26:21. And they digged also another; and for that they quarrelled
likewise, and he called the name of it, Enmity.

26:22. Going forward from thence, he digged another well, for which they
contended not; therefore he called the name thereof, Latitude, saying:
Now hath the Lord given us room, and made us to increase upon the earth.

Latitude... That is, wideness, or room.

26:23. And he went up from that place to Bersabee,

26:24. Where the Lord appeared to him that same night, saying: I am the
God of Abraham thy father, do not fear, for I am with thee: I will bless
thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

26:25. And he built there an altar: and called upon the name of the
Lord, and pitched his tent; and commanded his servants to dig a well.

26:26. To which place when Abimelech, and Ochozath his friend, and
Phicol chief captain of his soldiers, came from Gerara,

26:27. Isaac said to them: Why are ye come to me, a man whom you hate,
and have thrust out from you?

26:28. And they answered: We saw that the Lord is with thee, and
therefore we said: Let there be an oath between us, and let us make a
covenant,

26:29. That thou do us no harm, as we on our part have touched nothing
of thine, nor have done any thing to hurt thee; but with peace have sent
thee away, increased with the blessing of the Lord.

26:30. And he made them a feast, and after they had eaten and drunk:

26:31. Arising in the morning, they swore one to another: and Isaac sent
them away peaceably to their own home.

26:32. And behold, the same day the servants of Isaac came, telling him
of a well which they had digged, and saying: We have found water.

26:33. Whereupon he called it Abundance: and the name of the city was
called Bersabee, even to this day.

26:34. And Esau being forty years old, married wives, Judith, the
daughter of Beeri, the Hethite, and Basemath, the daughter of Elon, of
the same place.

26:35. And they both offended the mind of Isaac and Rebecca.

Genesis Chapter 27

Jacob, by him mother's counsel, obtaineth his father's blessing instead
of Esau. And by her is advised to fly to his uncle Laban.

27:1. Now Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, and he could not see:
and he called Esau, his elder son, and said to him: My son? And he
answered: Here I am.

27:2. And his father said to him, Thou seest that I am old, and know not
the day of my death.

27:3. Take thy arms, thy quiver, and bow, and go abroad; and when thou
hast taken something by hunting,

27:4. Make me a savoury meat thereof, as thou knowest I like, and bring
it that I may eat: and my soul may bless thee, before I die.

27:5. And when Rebecca had heard this, and he was gone into the field to
fulfil his father's commandment,

27:6. She said to her son Jacob: I heard thy father talking with Esau,
thy brother, and saying to him:

27:7. Bring me of thy hunting, and make me meats that I may eat, and
bless thee in the sight of the Lord, before I die.

27:8. Now therefore, my son, follow my counsel:

27:9. And go thy way to the flock, bring me two kids of the best, that I
may make of them meat for thy father, such as he gladly eateth.

27:10. Which when thou hast brought in, and he hath eaten, he may bless
thee before he die.

27:11. And he answered her: Thou knowest that Esau, my brother, is a
hairy man, and I am smooth:

27:12. If my father should feel me, and perceive it, I fear lest he will
think I would have mocked him, and I shall bring upon me a curse instead
of a blessing.

27:13. And his mother said to him: Upon me be this curse, my son: only
hear thou my voice, and go, fetch me the things which I have said.

27:14. He went, and brought, and gave them to his mother. She dressed
meats, such as she knew his father liked.

27:15. And she put on him very good garments of Esau, which she had at
home with her:

27:16. And the little skins of the kids she put about his hands, and
covered the bare of his neck.

27:17. And she gave him the savoury meat, and delivered him bread that
she had baked.

27:18. Which when he had carried in, he said: My father? But he
answered: I hear. Who art thou, my son?

27:19. And Jacob said: I am Esau, thy firstborn: I have done as thou
didst command me: arise, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

I am Esau thy firstborn... St. Augustine (L. Contra mendacium, c. 10),
treating at large upon this place, excuseth Jacob from a lie, because
this whole passage was mysterious, as relating to the preference which
was afterwards to be given to the Gentiles before the carnal Jews, which
Jacob by prophetic light might understand. So far is certain, that the
first birthright, both by divine election and by Esau's free cession
belonged to Jacob: so that if there were any lie in the case, it could
be no more than an officious and venial one.

27:20. And Isaac said to his son: How couldst thou find it so quickly,
my son? He answered: It was the will of God, that what I sought came
quickly in my way:

27:21. And Isaac said: Come hither, that I may feel thee, my son, and
may prove whether thou be my son Esau, or no.

27:22. He came near to his father, and when he had felt him, Isaac said:
The voice indeed is the voice of Jacob; but the hands, are the hands of
Esau.

27:23. And he knew him not, because his hairy hands made him like to the
elder. Then blessing him,

27:24. He said: Art thou my son Esau? He answered: I am.

27:25. Then he said: Bring me the meats of thy hunting, my son, that my
soul may bless thee. And when they were brought, and he had eaten, he
offered him wine also, which after he had drunk,

27:26. He said to him: Come near me, and give me a kiss, my son.

27:27. He came near, and kissed him. And immediately as he smelled the
fragrant smell of his garments, blessing him, he said: Behold, the smell
of my son is as the smell of a plentiful field, which the Lord hath
blessed.

27:28. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the
earth, abundance of corn and wine.

27:29. And let peoples serve thee, and tribes worship thee: be thou lord
of thy brethren, and let thy mother's children bow down before thee.
Cursed be he that curseth thee: and let him that blesseth thee be filled
with blessings.

27:30. Isaac had scarce ended his words, when, Jacob being now gone out
abroad, Esau came,

27:31. And brought in to his father meats, made of what he had taken in
hunting, saying: Arise, my father, and eat of thy son's venison; that
thy soul may bless me.

27:32. And Isaac said to him: Why! who art thou? He answered: I am thy
firstborn son, Esau.

27:33. Isaac was struck with fear, and astonished exceedingly; and
wondering beyond what can be believed, said: Who is he then that even
now brought me venison that he had taken, and I ate of all before thou
camest? and I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed.

27:34. Esau having heard his father's words, roared out with a great
cry; and, being in a consternation, said: Bless me also, my father.

27:35. And he said: Thy brother came deceitfully and got thy blessing.

27:36. But he said again: Rightly is his name called Jacob; for he hath
supplanted me lo this second time: My birthright he took away before,
and now this second time he hath stolen away my blessing. And again he
said to his father: Hast thou not reserved me also a blessing?

Jacob... That is, a supplanter.

27:37. Isaac answered: I have appointed him thy lord, and have made all
his brethren his servants: I have established him with corn and wine,
and after this, what shall I do more for thee, my son?

27:38. And Esau said to him: Hast thou only one blessing, father? I
beseech thee bless me also. And when he wept with a loud cry,

27:39. Isaac being moved, said to him: In the fat of the earth, and in
the dew of heaven from above,

27:40. Shall thy blessing be. Thou shalt live by the sword, and shalt
serve thy brother: and the time shall come, when thou shalt shake off
and loose his yoke from thy neck.

27:41. Esau therefore always hated Jacob, for the blessing wherewith his
father had blessed him; and he said in his heart: The days will come of
the mourning for my father, and I will kill my brother Jacob.

27:42. These things were told to Rebecca: and she sent and called Jacob,
her son, and said to him: Behold Esau, thy brother, threateneth to kill
thee.

27:43. Now therefore, my son, hear my voice, arise and flee to Laban, my
brother, to Haran:

27:44. And thou shalt dwell with him a few days, till the wrath of thy
brother be assuaged,

27:45. And his indignation cease, and he forget the things thou hast
done to him: afterwards I will send, and bring thee from thence hither.
Why shall I be deprived of both my sons in one day?

27:46. And Rebecca said to Isaac: I am weary of my life, because of the
daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the stock of this land, I
choose not to live.

Genesis Chapter 28

Jacob's journey to Mesopotamia: his vision and vow.

28:1. And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, saying:
Take not a wife of the stock of Chanaan:

28:2. But go, and take a journey to Mesopotamia of Syria, to the house
of Bathuel, thy mother's father, and take thee a wife thence of the
daughters of Laban, thy uncle.

28:3. And God almighty bless thee, and make thee to increase and
multiply thee: that thou mayst be a multitude of people.

28:4. And give the blessings of Araham to thee, and to thy seed after
thee: that thou mayst possess the land of thy sojournment, which he
promised to thy grandfather.

28:5. And when Isaac had sent him away, he took his journey and went to
Mesopotamia of Syria, to Laban, the son of Bathuel, the Syrian, brother
to Rebecca, his mother.

28:6. And Esau seeing that his father had blessed Jacob, and had sent
him into Mesopotamia of Syria, to marry a wife thence; and that after
the blessing he had charged him, saying: Thou shalt not take a wife of
the daughters of Chanaan:

28:7. And that Jacob obeying his parents, was gone into Syria:

28:8. Experiencing also, that his father was not well pleased with the
daughters of Chanaan:

28:9. He went to Ismael, and took to wife, besides them he had before,
Maheleth, the daughter of Ismael, Abraham's son, the sister of Nabajoth.

28:10. But Jacob being departed from Bersabee, went on to Haran.

28:11. And when he was come to a certain place, and would rest in it
after sunset, he took of the stones that lay there, and putting under
his head, slept in the same place.

28:12. And he saw in his sleep a ladder standing upon the earth, and the
top thereof touching heaven: the angels also of God ascending and
descending by it.

28:13. And the Lord leaning upon the ladder saying to him: I am the Lord
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: The land, wherein thou
sleepest, I will give to thee and to thy seed.

28:14. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth: thou shalt spread
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south:
and IN THEE and thy seed, all the tribes of the earth SHALL BE BLESSED.

28:15. And I will be thy keeper whithersoever thou goest, and will bring
thee back into this land: neither will I leave thee, till I shall have
accomplished all that I have said.

28:16. And when Jacob awaked out of sleep, he said: Indeed the Lord is
in this place, and I knew it not.

28:17. And trembling, he said: How terrible is this place? this is no
other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven.

28:18. And Jacob arising in the morning, took the stone which he had
laid under his head, and set it up for a title, pouring oil upon the top
of it.

28:19. And he called the name of the city Bethel, which before was
called Luza.

Bethel... This name signifies the house of God.

28:20. And he made a vow, saying: If God shall be with me, and shall
keep me in the way, by which I walk, and shall give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on,

28:21. And I shall return prosperously to my father's house: the Lord
shall be my God:

28:22. And this stone, which I have set up for a title, shall be called
the house of God: and of all things that thou shalt give to me, I will
offer tithes to thee.

Genesis Chapter 29

Jacob serveth Laban seven years for Rachel: but is deceived with Lia: he
afterwards marrieth Rachel. Lia bears him four sons.

29:1. Then Jacob went on in his journey, and came into the east country.

29:2. And he saw a well in the field, and three flocks of sheep lying by
it: for the beasts were watered out of it, and the mouth thereof was
closed with a great stone.

29:3. And the custom was, when all the sheep were gathered together, to
roll away the stone, and after the sheep were watered, to put it on the
mouth of the well again.

29:4. And he said to the shepherds: Brethren, whence are you? They
answered: Of Haran.

29:5. And he asked them, saying: Know you Laban, the son of Nachor? They
said: We know him.

29:6. He said: Is he in health? He is in health, say they: and behold,
Rachel, his daughter, cometh with his flock.

29:7. And Jacob said: There is yet much day remaining, neither is it
time to bring the flocks into the folds again: first give the sheep
drink, and so lead them back to feed.

29:8. They answered: We cannot, till all the cattle be gathered
together, and we remove the stone from the well's mouth, that we may
water the flocks.

29:9. They were yet speaking, and behold Rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she fed the flock.

29:10. And when Jacob saw her, and knew her to be his cousin german, and
that they were the sheep of Laban, his uncle: he removed the stone
wherewith the well was closed.

29:11. And having watered the flock, he kissed her: and lifting up his
voice wept.

29:12. And he told her that he was her father's brother, and the son of
Rebecca: but she went in haste and told her father.

29:13. Who, when he heard that Jacob his sister's son was come, ran
forth to meet him: and embracing him, and heartily kissing him, brought
him into his house. And when he had heard the causes of his journey,

29:14. He answered: Thou art my bone and my flesh. And after the days of
one month were expired,

29:15. He said to him: Because thou art my brother, shalt thou serve me
without wages? Tell me what wages thou wilt have.

29:16. Now he had two daughters, the name of the elder was Lia; and the
younger was called Rachel.

29:17. But Lia was blear-eyed: Rachel was well favoured, and of a
beautiful countenance.

29:18. And Jacob being in love with her, said: I will serve thee seven
years for Rachel, thy younger daughter.

29:19. Laban answered: It is better that I give her to thee than to
another man; stay with me.

29:20. So Jacob served seven years for Rachel: and they seemed but a few
days, because of the greatness of his love.

29:21. And he said to Laban: Give me my wife; for now the time is
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

29:22. And he, having invited a great number of his friends to the
feast, made the marriage.

29:23. And at night he brought in Lia, his daughter, to him,

29:24. Giving his daughter a handmaid, named Zelpha. Now when Jacob had
gone in to her according to custom, when morning was come he saw it was
Lia.

29:25. And he said to his father-in-law: What is it that thou didst mean
to do? did not I serve thee for Rachel? why hast thou deceived me?

29:26. Laban answered: It is not the custom in this place, to give the
younger in marriage first.

29:27. Make up the week of days of this match: and I will give thee her
also, for the service that thou shalt render me other seven years.

29:28. He yielded to his pleasure: and after the week was past, he
married Rachel:

29:29. To whom her father gave Bala, for her servant.

29:30. And having at length obtained the marriage he wished for, he
preferred the love of the latter before the former, and served with him
other seven years.

29:31. And the Lord seeing that he despised Lia, opened her womb, but
her sister remained barren.

29:32. And she conceived and bore a son, and called his name Ruben,
saying: The Lord saw my affliction: now my husband will love me.

29:33. And again she conceived and bore a son, and said: Because the
Lord heard that I was despised, he hath given this also to me: and she
called his name Simeon.

29:34. And she conceived the third time, and bore another son, and said:
Now also my husband will be joined to me, because I have borne him three
sons: and therefore she called his name Levi.

29:35. The fourth time she conceived and bore a son, and said: Now will
I praise the Lord: and for this she called him Juda. And she left
bearing.

Genesis Chapter 30

Rachel, being barren, delivereth her handmaid to Jacob; she beareth two
sons. Lia ceasing to bear, giveth also her handmaid, and she beareth two
more. Then Lia beareth other two sons and one daughter. Rachel beareth
Joseph. Jacob, desirous to return home, is hired to stay for a certain
part of the flock's increase, whereby he becometh exceeding rich.

30:1. And Rachel seeing herself without children, envied her sister, and
said to her husband: Give me children, otherwise I shall die.

30:2. And Jacob being angry with her, answered: Am I as God, who hath
deprived thee of the fruit of thy womb?

30:3. But she said: I have here my servant Bala: go in unto her, that
she may bear upon my knees, and I may have children by her.

30:4. And she gave him Bala in marriage: who,

30:5. When her husband had gone in unto her, conceived and bore a son.

30:6. And Rachel said: The Lord hath judged for me, and hath heard my
voice, giving me a son; and therefore she called his name Dan.

30:7. And again Bala conceived, and bore another,

30:8. For whom Rachel said: God hath compared me with my sister, and I
have prevailed: and she called him Nephthali.

30:9. Lia perceiving that she had left of bearing, gave Zelpha, her
handmaid, to her husband.

30:10. And when she had conceived, and brought forth a son,

30:11. She said: Happily. And therefore called his name Gad.

30:12. Zelpha also bore another.

30:13. And Lia said: This is for my happiness: for women will call me
blessed. Therefore she called him Aser.

30:14. And Ruben going out in the time of the wheat harvest into the
field, found mandrakes: which he brought to his mother Lia. And Rachel
said: Give me part of thy son's mandrakes.

30:15. She answered: Dost thou think it a small matter, that thou hast
taken my husband from me, unless thou take also my son's mandrakes?
Rachel said: He shall sleep with thee this night, for thy son's
mandrakes.

30:16. And when Jacob returned at even from the field, Lia went out to
meet him, and said: Thou shalt come in unto me, because I have hired
thee for my son's mandrakes. And he slept with her that night.

30:17. And God heard her prayers; and she conceived: and bore a fifth
son:

30:18. And said: God hath given me a reward, because I gave my handmaid
to my husband. And she called his name Issachar.

30:19. And Lia conceived again, and bore the sixth son,

30:20. And said: God hath endowed me with a good dowry; this turn also
my husband will be with me, because I have borne him six sons: and
therefore she called his name Zabulon.

30:21. After whom she bore a daughter, named Dina.

30:22. The Lord also remembering Rachel, heard her, and opened her womb.

30:23. And she conceived, and bore a son, saying: God hath taken away my
reproach.

30:24. And she called his name Joseph: saying: The Lord give me also
another son.

30:25. And when Joseph was born, Jacob said to his father-in-law: Send
me away, that I may return into my country, and to my land.

30:26. Give me my wives, and my children, for whom I have served thee,
that I may depart: thou knowest the service that I have rendered thee.

30:27. Laban said to him: Let me find favour in thy sight: I have
learned, by experience, that God hath blessed me for thy sake.

30:28. Appoint thy wages which I shall give thee.

30:29. But he answered: Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how
great thy possession hath been in my hands.

30:30. Thou hadst but little before I came to thee, and now thou art
become rich: and the Lord hath blessed thee at my coming. It is
reasonable, therefore, that I should now provide also for my own house.

30:31. And Laban said: What shall I give thee? But he said: I require
nothing; but if thou wilt do what I demand, I will feed and keep thy
sheep again.

30:32. Go round through all thy flocks, and separate all the sheep of
divers colours, and speckled; and all that is brown and spotted, and of
divers colours, as well among the sheep as among the goats, shall be my
wages.

30:33. And my justice shall answer for me tomorrow before thee, when the
time of the bargain shall come; and all that is not of divers colours,
and spotted, and brown, as well among the sheep as among the goats,
shall accuse me of theft.

30:34. And Laban said: I like well what thou demandest.

30:35. And he separated the same day the she-goats, and the sheep, and
the he-goats, and the rams of divers colours, and spotted; and all the
flock of one colour, that is, of white and black fleece, he delivered
into the hands of his sons.

30:36. And he set the space of three days journey betwixt himself and
his son-in-law, who fed the rest of his flock.

30:37. And Jacob took green rods of poplar, and of almond, and of plane-
trees, and pilled them in part: so when the bark was taken off, in the
parts that were pilled, there appeared whiteness: but the parts that
were whole, remained green: and by this means the colour was divers.

30:38. And he put them in the troughs, where the water was poured out;
that when the flocks should come to drink, they might have the rods
before their eyes, and in the sight of them might conceive.

30:39. And it came to pass, that in the very heat of coition, the sheep
beheld the rods, and brought forth spotted, and of divers colours, and
speckled.

30:40. And Jacob separated the flock, and put the rods in the troughs
before the eyes of the rams; and all the white and the black were
Laban's, and the rest were Jacob's, when the flocks were separated one
from the other.

30:41. So when the ewes went first to ram, Jacob put the rods in the
troughs of water before the eyes of the rams, and of the ewes, that they
might conceive while they were looking upon them.

30:42. But when the later coming was, and the last conceiving, he did
not put them. And those that were lateward, became Laban's; and they of
the first time, Jacob's.

30:43. And the man was enriched exceedingly, and he had many flocks,
maid-servants and men-servants, camels and asses.

Genesis Chapter 31

Jacob's departure: he is pursued and overtaken by Laban. They make a
covenant.

31:1. But after that he had heard the words of the sons of Laban,
saying: Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's, and being
enriched by his substance is become great.

31:2. And perceiving also, that Laban's countenance was not towards him
as yesterday and the other day.

31:3. Especially the Lord saying to him: Return into the land of thy
fathers and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee.

31:4. He sent, and called Rachel and Lia into the field, where he fed
the flocks,

31:5. And said to them: I see your father's countenance is not towards
me as yesterday and the other day: but the God of my father hath been
with me.

31:6. And you know that I have served your father to the uttermost of my
power.

31:7. Yea your father hath also overreached me, and hath changed my
wages ten times: and yet God hath not suffered him to hurt me.

31:8. If at any time, he said: The speckled shall be thy wages: all the
sheep brought forth speckled: but when he said on the contrary: Thou
shalt take all the white one for thy wages: all the flocks brought forth
white ones.

31:9. And God hath taken your father's substance, and given it to me.

31:10. For after the time came of the ewes conceiving, I lifted up my
eyes, and saw in my sleep, that the males which leaped upon the females
were of divers colours, and spotted, and speckled.

31:11. And the angel of God said to me in my sleep: Jacob. And I
answered: Here I am.

31:12. And he said: Lift up thy eyes, and see that all the males leaping
upon the females, are of divers colours, spotted and speckled. For I
have seen all that Laban hath done to thee.

31:13. I am the God of Bethel, where thou didst anoint the stone, and
make a vow to me. Now therefore arise, and go out of this land, and
return into thy native country.

31:14. And Rachel and Lia answered: Have we any thing left among the
goods and inheritance of our father's house?

31:15. Hath he not counted us as strangers, and sold us, and eaten up
the price of us?

31:16. But God hath taken our father's riches, and delivered them to us,
and to our children: wherefore, do all that God hath commanded thee.

31:17. Then Jacob rose up, and having set his children and wives upon
camels, went his way.

31:18. And he took all his substance, and flocks, and whatsoever he had
gotten in Mesopotamia, and went forward to Isaac, his father, to the
land of Chanaan.

31:19. At that time Laban was gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole
away her father's idols.

Her father's idols... By this it appears that Laban was an idolater; and
some of the fathers are of opinion that Rachel stole away these idols to
withdraw him from idolatry, removing the occasion of his sin.

31:20. And Jacob would not confess to his father-in-law that he was
flying away.

31:21. And when he was gone, together with all that belonged to him, and
having passed the river, was going on towards mount Galaad,

31:22. It was told Laban on the third day, that Jacob fled.

31:23. And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days; and overtook him in the mount of Galaad.

31:24. And he saw in a dream God, saying to him: Take heed thou speak
not any thing harshly against Jacob.

31:25. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain: and when he, with
his brethren, had overtaken him, he pitched his tent in the same mount
of Galaad.

31:26. And he said to Jacob: Why hast thou done thus, to carry away,
without my knowledge, my daughters as captives taken with the sword?

31:27. Why wouldst thou run away privately, and not acquaint me, that I
might have brought thee on the way with joy, and with songs, and with
timbrels, and with harps?

31:28. Thou hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and daughters; thou
hast done foolishly; and now indeed,

31:29. It is in my power to return thee evil; but the God of your father
said to me yesterday: Take heed thou speak not any thing harshly against
Jacob.

31:30. Suppose thou didst desire to go to thy friends, and hadst a
longing after thy father's house: why hast thou stolen away my gods?

31:31. Jacob answered: That I departed unknown to thee, it was for fear
lest thou wouldst take away thy daughters by force.

31:32. But, whereas, thou chargest me with theft: with whomsoever thou
shalt find thy gods, let him be slain before our brethren. Search, and
if thou find any of thy things with me, take them away. Now when he said
this, he knew not that Rachel had stolen the idols.

31:33. So Laban went into the tent of Jacob, and of Lia, and of both the
handmaids, and found them not. And when he was entered into Rachel's
tent,

31:34. She, in haste, hid the idols under the camel's furniture, and sat
upon them: and when he had searched all the tent, and found nothing,

31:35. She said: Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise up before
thee, because it has now happened to me according to the custom of
women. So his careful search was in vain.

31:36. And Jacob being angry, said in a chiding manner: For what fault
of mine, and for what offence on my part hast thou so hotly pursued me,

31:37. And searched all my household stuff? What hast thou found of all
the substance of thy house? lay it here before my brethren, and thy
brethren, and let them judge between me and thee.

31:38. Have I, therefore, been with thee twenty years? thy ewes and
goats were not barren, the rams of thy flocks I did not eat:

31:39. Neither did I shew thee that which the beast had torn; I made
good all the damage: whatsoever was lost by theft, thou didst exact it
of me:

31:40. Day and night was I parched with heat, and with frost, and sleep
departed from my eyes.

31:41. And in this manner have I served thee in thy house twenty years,
fourteen for thy daughters, and six for thy flocks: thou hast changed
also my wages ten times.

31:42. Unless the God of my father, Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had
stood by me, peradventure now thou hadst sent me away naked: God beheld
my affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesterday.

31:43. Laban answered him: The daughters are mine, and the children, and
thy flocks, and all things that thou seest are mine: what can I do to my
children, and grandchildren?

31:44. Come, therefore, let us enter into a league; that it may be for a
testimony between me and thee.

31:45. And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a title.

31:46. And he said to his brethren: Bring hither stones. And they,
gathering stones together, made a heap, and they ate upon it.

31:47. And Laban called it, The witness heap; and Jacob, The hillock of
testimony: each of them according to the propriety of his language.

31:48. And Laban said: This heap shall be a witness between me and thee
this day, and therefore the name thereof was called Galaad, that is, The
witness heap.

31:49. The Lord behold and judge between us, when we shall be gone one
from the other.

31:50. If thou afflict my daughters, and if thou bring in other wives
over them: none is witness of our speech but God, who is present and
beholdeth.

31:51. And he said again to Jacob: Behold this heap, and the stone which
I have set up between me and thee,

31:52. Shall be a witness: this heap, I say, and the stone, be they for
a testimony, if either I shall pass beyond it going towards thee, or
thou shalt pass beyond it thinking harm to me.

31:53. The God of Abraham, and the God of Nachor, the God of their
father, judge between us. And Jacob swore by the fear of his father
Isaac:

31:54. And after he had offered sacrifices in the mountain, he called
his brethren to eat bread. And when they had eaten, they lodged there:

31:55. But Laban arose in the night, and kissed his sons and daughters,
and blessed them: and returned to his place.

Genesis Chapter 32

Jacob's vision of angels; his message and presents to Esau; his
wrestling with an angel.

32:1. Jacob also went on the journey he had begun: and the angels of God
met him.

32:2. And when he saw them, he said: These are the camps of God, and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim, that is, Camps.

32:3. And he sent messengers before him to Esau, his brother, to the
land of Seir, to the country of Edom:

32:4. And he commanded them, saying: Thus shall ye speak to my lord
Esau: Thus saith thy brother Jacob: I have sojourned with Laban, and
have been with him until this day:

32:5. I have oxen, and asses, and sheep, and men-servants, and
women-servants: and now I send a message to my lord, that I may find
favour in thy sight.

32:6. And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying: We came to Esau, thy
brother, and behold he cometh with speed to meet thee with four hundred
men.

32:7. Then Jacob was greatly afraid; and in his fear divided the people
that was with him, and the flocks, and the sheep, and the oxen, and the
camels, into two companies,

32:8. Saying: If Esau come to one company, and destroy it, the other
company that is left, shall escape.

32:9. And Jacob said: O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
Isaac: O Lord who saidst to me, Return to thy land, and to the place of
thy birth, and I will do well for thee.

32:10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of thy truth
which thou hast fulfilled to thy servant. With my staff I passed over
this Jordan; and now I return with two companies.

32:11. Deliver me from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am greatly
afraid of him; lest perhaps he come, and kill the mother with the
children.

32:12. Thou didst say, that thou wouldst do well by me, and multiply my
seed like the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

32:13. And when he had slept there that night, he set apart, of the
things which he had, presents for his brother Esau,

32:14. Two hundred she-goats, twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes, and
twenty rams,

32:15. Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and twenty
bulls, twenty she-asses, and ten of their foals.

32:16. And he sent them by the hands of his servants, every drove by
itself, and he said to his servants: Go before me, and let there be a
space between drove and drove.

32:17. And he commanded the first, saying: If thou meet my brother Esau,
and he ask thee: Whose art thou? or whither goest thou? or whose are
these before thee?

32:18. Thou shalt answer: Thy servant Jacob's: he hath sent them as a
present to my lord Esau; and he cometh after us.

32:19. In like manner he commanded the second, and the third, and all
that followed the droves, saying: Speak ye the same words to Esau, when
ye find him.

32:20. And ye shall add: Thy servant Jacob himself also followeth after
us; for he said: I will appease him with the presents that go before,
and afterwards I will see him, perhaps he will be gracious to me.

32:21. So the presents went before him, but himself lodged that night in
the camp.

32:22. And rising early, he took his two wives and his two handmaids,
with his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of Jaboc.

32:23. And when all things were brought over that belonged to him,

32:24. He remained alone; and behold, a man wrestled with him till
morning.

A man, etc... This was an angel in human shape, as we learn from Osee
12.4. He is called God, ver. 28 and 30, because he represented the
person of the Son of God. This wrestling, in which Jacob, assisted by
God, was a match for an angel, was so ordered (ver. 28,) that he might
learn by this experiment of the divine assistance, that neither Esau,
nor any other man, should have power to hurt him.-It was also spiritual,
as appeareth by his earnest prayer, urging and at last obtaining the
angel's blessing.

32:25. And when he saw that he could not overcome him, he touched the
sinew of his thigh, and forthwith it shrank.

32:26. And he said to him: Let me go, for it is break of day. He
answered: I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27. And he said: What is thy name? He answered: Jacob.

32:28. But he said: Thy name shall not be called Jacob, but Israel; for
if thou hast been strong against God, how much more shalt thou prevail
against men?

32:29. Jacob asked him: Tell me by what name art thou called? He
answered: Why dost thou ask my name? And he blessed him in the same
place.

32:30. And Jacob called the name of the place Phanuel, saying: I have
seen God face to face, and my soul has been saved.

Phanuel... This word signifies the face of God, or the sight, or seeing
of God.

32:31. And immediately the sun rose upon him, after he was past Phanuel;
but he halted on his foot.

32:32. Therefore the children of Israel, unto this day, eat not the
sinew, that shrank in Jacob's thigh: because he touched the sinew of his
thigh and it shrank.

Genesis Chapter 33

Jacob and Esau meet: Jacob goeth to Salem, where he raiseth an altar.

33:1. And Jacob lifting up his eyes, saw Esau coming, and with him four
hundred men: and he divided the children of Lia and of Rachel, and of
the two handmaids.

33:2. And he put both the handmaids and their children foremost: and Lia
and her children in the second place: and Rachel and Joseph last.

33:3. And he went forward and bowed down with his face to the ground
seven times, until his brother came near.

33:4. Then Esau ran to meet his brother, and embraced him: and clasping
him fast about the neck, and kissing him, wept.

33:5. And lifting up his eyes, he saw the women and their children, and
said: What mean these? And do they belong to thee? He answered: They are
the children which God hath given to me, thy servant.

33:6. Then the handmaids and their children came near and bowed
themselves.

33:7. Lia also, with her children, came near and bowed down in like
manner; and last of all, Joseph and Rachel bowed down.

33:8. And Esau said: What are the droves that I met? He answered: That I
might find favour before my lord.

33:9. But he said: I have plenty, my brother, keep what is thine for
thyself.

33:10. And Jacob said: Do not so I beseech thee, but if I have found
favour in thy eyes, receive a little present at my hands: for I have
seen thy face, as if I should have seen the countenance of God: be
gracious to me,

33:11. And take the blessing which I have brought thee, and which God
hath given me, who giveth all things. He took it with much ado at his
brother's earnest pressing him,

33:12. And said: Let us go on together, and I will accompany thee in thy
journey.

33:13. And Jacob said: My lord, thou knowest that I have with me tender
children, and sheep, and kine with young: which if I should cause to be
overdriven, in one day all the flocks will die.

33:14. May it please my lord to go before his servant: and I will follow
softly after him, as I shall see my children to be able, until I come to
my lord in Seir.

33:15. Esau answered: I beseech thee, that some of the people, at least,
who are with me, may stay to accompany thee in the way. And he said:
There is no necessity: I want nothing else but only to find favour, my
lord, in thy sight.

33:16. So Esau returned that day, the way that he came, to Seir.

33:17. And Jacob came to Socoth: where having built a house, and pitched
tents, he called the name of the place Socoth, that is, Tents.

33:18. And he passed over to Salem, a city of the Sichemites, which is
in the land of Chanaan, after he returned from Mesopotamia of Syria: and
he dwelt by the town.

33:19. And he bought that part of the field, in which he pitched his
tents, of the children of Hemor, the father of Sichem, for a hundred
lambs.

33:20. And raising an altar there, he invoked upon it the most mighty
God of Israel.

Genesis Chapter 34

Dina is ravished, for which the Sichemites are destroyed.

34:1. And Dina the daughter of Lia went out to see the women of that
country.

34:2. And when Sichem the son of Hemor the Hevite, the prince of that
land, saw her, he was in love with her: and took her away, and lay with
her, ravishing the virgin.

34:3. And his soul was fast knit unto her; and whereas she was sad, he
comforted her with sweet words.

34:4. And going to Hemor his father, he said: Get me this damsel to
wife.

34:5. But when Jacob had heard this, his sons being absent, and employed
in feeding the cattle, he held his peace till they came back.

34:6. And when Hemor the father of Sichem was come out to speak to
Jacob,

34:7. Behold his sons came from the field: and hearing what had passed,
they were exceeding angry, because he had done a foul thing in Israel,
and committed an unlawful act, in ravishing Jacob's daughter.

34:8. And Hemor spoke to them: The soul of my son Sichem has a longing
for your daughter: give her him to wife:

34:9. And let us contract marriages one with another: give us your
daughters, and take you our daughters.

34:10. And dwell with us: the land is at your command, till, trade, and
possess it.

34:11. Sichem also said to her father and to her brethren: Let me find
favour in your sight, and whatsoever you shall appoint I will give:

34:12. Raise the dowry, and ask gifts, and I will gladly give what you
shall demand: only give me this damsel to wife.

34:13. The sons of Jacob answered Sichem and his father deceitfully,
being enraged at the deflowering of their sister:

Deceitfully... The sons of Jacob, on this occasion, were guilty of a
grievous sin, as well by falsely pretending religion, as by excess of
revenge: though otherwise their zeal against so foul a crime was
commendable.

34:14. We cannot do what you demand, nor give our sister to one that is
uncircumcised; which with us is unlawful and abominable.

34:15. But in this we may be allied with you, if you will be like us,
and all the male sex among you be circumcised:

34:16. Then will we mutually give and take your daughters, and ours; and
we will dwell with you, and will be one people:

34:17. But if you will not be circumcised, we will take our daughter and
depart.

34:18. Their offer pleased Hemor, and Sichem, his son:

34:19. And the young man made no delay, but forthwith fulfilled what was
required: for he loved the damsel exceedingly, and he was the greatest
man in all his father's house.

34:20. And going into the gate of the city, they spoke to the people:

34:21. These men are peaceable, and are willing to dwell with us: let
them trade in the land, and till it, which being large and wide wanteth
men to till it: we shall take their daughters for wives, and we will
give them ours.

34:22. One thing there is for which so great a good is deferred: We must
circumcise every male among us, following the manner of the nation.

34:23. And their substance, and cattle, and all that they possess, shall
be ours; only in this let us condescend, and by dwelling together, we
shall make one people.

34:24. And they all agreed, and circumcised all the males.

34:25. And behold the third day, when the pain of the wound was
greatest: two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, the brothers of
Dina, taking their swords, entered boldly into the city and slew all the
men.

34:26. And they killed also Hemor and Sichem, and took away their sister
Dina out of Sichem's house.

34:27. And when they were gone out, the other sons of Jacob came upon
the slain; and plundered the city in revenge of the rape.

34:28. And they took their sheep, and their herds, and their asses,
wasting all they had in their houses and in their fields.

34:29. And their children and wives they took captive.

34:30. And when they had boldly perpetrated these things, Jacob said to
Simeon and Levi: You have troubled me, and made me hateful to the
Chanaanites and Pherezites, the inhabitants of this land. We are few:
they will gather themselves together and kill me; and both I, and my
house shall be destroyed.

34:31. They answered: Should they abuse our sister as a strumpet?

Genesis Chapter 35

Jacob purgeth his family from idols: goeth by God's commandment to
Bethel, and there buildeth an altar. God appearing again to Jacob
blesseth him, and changeth his name into Israel. Rachel dieth in
childbirth. Isaac also dieth.

35:1. In the mean time God said to Jacob: Arise and go up to Bethel, and
dwell there, and make there an altar to God, who appeared to thee when
thou didst flee from Esau, thy brother.

35:2. And Jacob having called together all his household, said: Cast
away the strange gods that are among you, and be cleansed, and change
your garments.

35:3. Arise, and let us go up to Bethel, that we may make there an altar
to God; who heard me in the day of my affliction, and accompained me in
my journey.

35:4. So they gave him all the strange gods they had, and the earrings
which were in their ears: and he buried them under the turpentine tree,
that is behind the city of Sichem.

35:5. And when they were departed, the terror of God fell upon all the
cities round about, and they durst not pursue after them as they went
away.

35:6. And Jacob came to Luza, which is in the land of Chanaan, surnamed
Bethel: he and all the people that were with him.

35:7. And he built there an altar, and called the name of that place,
The house of God: for there God appeared to him when he fled from his
brother.

35:8. At the same time Debora, the nurse of Rebecca, died, and was
buried at the foot of Bethel, under an oak, and the name of that place
was called, The oak of weeping.

35:9. And God appeared again to Jacob, after he returned from
Mesopotamia of Syria, and he blessed him,

35:10. Saying: Thou shalt not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall
be thy name. And he called him Israel.

Israel... This name signifieth one that prevaileth with God.

35:11. And said to him: I am God almighty, increase thou and be
multiplied. Nations and peoples of nations shall be from thee, and kings
shall come out of thy loins.

35:12. And the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give to
thee, and to thy seed after thee.

35:13. And he departed from him.

35:14. But he set up a monument of stone, in the place where God had
spoken to him: pouring drink-offerings upon it, and pouring oil thereon:

35:15. And calling the name of that place Bethel.

35:16. And going forth from thence, he came in the spring time to the
land which leadeth to Ephrata: wherein when Rachel was in travail,

35:17. By reason of her hard labour, she began to be in danger, and the
midwife said to her: Fear not, for thou shalt have this son also.

35:18. And when her soul was departing for pain, and death was now at
hand, she called the name of her son Benoni, that is, the son of my
pain: but his father called him Benjamin, that is, the son of the right
hand.

35:19. So Rachel died, and was buried in the highway that leadeth to
Ephrata, this is Bethlehem.

35:20. And Jacob erected a pillar over her sepulchre: this is the pillar
of Rachel's monument, to this day.

35:21. Departing thence, he pitched his tent beyond the Flock tower.

35:22. And when he dwelt in that country, Ruben went, and slept with
Bala the concubine of his father: which he was not ignorant of. Now the
sons of Jacob were twelve.

The concubine... She was his lawful wife; but, according to the style of
the Hebrews, is called concubine, because of her servile extraction.

35:23. The sons of Lia: Ruben the first born, and Simeon, and Levi, and
Juda, and Issachar, and Zabulon.

35:24. The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.

35:25. The sons of Bala, Rachel's handmaid: Dan and Nephthali.

35:26. The sons of Zelpha, Lia's handmaid: Gad and Aser: these are the
sons of Jacob, that were born to him in Mesopotamia of Syria.

35:27. And he came to Isaac his father in Mambre, the city of Arbee,
this is Hebron: wherein Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

35:28. And the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years.

35:29. And being spent with age he died, and was gathered to his people,
being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

Genesis Chapter 36

Esau with his wives and children parteth from Jacob. An account of his
descendants, and of the first kings of Edom.

36:1. And these are the generations of Esau, the same is Edom.

36:2. Esau took wives of the daughters of Chanaan: Ada the daughter of
Elon the Hethite, and Oolibama the daughter of Ana, the daughter of
Sebeon the Hevite:

Ada... These wives of Esau are called by other names, Gen. 26. But it
was very common amongst the ancients for the same persons to have two
names, as Esau himself was also called Edom.

36:3. And Basemath, the daughter of Ismael, sister of Nabajoth.

36:4. And Ada bore Eliphaz: Basemath bore Rahuel.

36:5. Oolibama bore Jehus, and Ihelon, and Core. These are the sons of
Esau, that were born to him in the land of Chanaan.

36:6. And Esau took his wives, and his sons and daughters, and every
soul of his house, and his substance, and cattle, and all that he was
able to acquire in the land of Chanaan: and went into another country,
and departed from his brother Jacob.

36:7. For they were exceeding rich, and could not dwell together:
neither was the land in which they sojourned able to bear them, for the
multitude of their flocks.

36:8. And Esau dwelt in mount Seir: he is Edom.

36:9. And these are the generations of Esau, the father of Edom, in
mount Seir.

36:10. And these the names of his sons: Eliphaz the son of Ada, the wife
of Esau: and Rahuel, the son of Basemath, his wife.

36:11. And Eliphaz had sons: Theman, Omar, Sepho, and Gatham and Cenez.

36:12. And Thamna was the concubine of Eliphaz, the son of Esau: and she
bore him Amalech. These are the sons of Ada, the wife of Esau.

36:13. And the sons of Rahuel were Nahath and Zara, Samma and Meza.
These were the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.

36:14. And these were the sons of Oolibama, the daughter of Ana, the
daughter of Sebeon, the wife of Esau, whom she bore to him, Jehus, and
Ihelon, and Core.

36:15. These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz, the
firstborn of Esau: duke Theman, duke Omar, duke Sepho, duke Cenez,

36:16. Duke Core, duke Gatham, duke Amalech: these are the sons of
Eliphaz, in the land of Edom, and these the sons of Ada.

36:17. And these were the sons of Rahuel, the son of Esau: duke Nahath,
duke Zara, duke Samma, duke Meza. And these are the dukes of Rahuel, in
the land of Edom: these the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.

36:18. And these the sons of Oolibama, the wife of Esau: duke Jehus,
duke Ihelon, duke Core. These are the dukes of Oolibama, the daughter of
Ana, and wife of Esau.

36:19. These are the sons of Esau, and these the dukes of them: the same
is Edom.

36:20. These are the sons of Seir, the Horrite, the inhabitants of the
land: Lotan, and Sobal, and Sebeon, and Ana,

36:21. And Dison, and Eser, and Disan. These are dukes of the Horrites,
the sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.

36:22. And Lotan had sons: Hori and Heman. And the sister of Lotan was
Thamna.

36:23. And these the sons of Sobal: Alvan, and Manahat, and Ebal, and
Sepho, and Onam.

36:24. And these the sons of Sebeon: Aia and Ana. This is Ana that found
the hot waters in the wilderness, when he fed the asses of Sebeon, his
father:

36:25. And he had a son Dison, and a daughter Oolibama.

36:26. And these were the sons of Dison: Hamdan, and Eseban, and
Jethram, and Charan.

36:27. These also were the sons of Eser: Balaan, and Zavan, and Acan.

36:28. And Dison had sons: Hus and Aram.

36:29. These were dukes of the Horrites: duke Lotan, duke Sobal, duke
Sebeon, duke Ana,

36:30. Duke Dison, duke Eser, duke Disan: these were dukes of the
Horrites that ruled in the land of Seir.

36:31. And the kings that ruled in the land of Edom, before the children
of Israel had a king, were these:

36:32. Bela the son of Beor, and the name of his city Denaba.

36:33. And Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zara, of Bosra, reigned in
his stead.

36:34. And when Jobab was dead, Husam, of the land of the Themanites,
reigned in his stead.

36:35. And after his death, Adad, the son of Badad, reigned in his
stead, who defeated the Madianites in the country of Boab; and the name
of his city was Avith.

36:36. And when Adad was dead, there reigned in his stead, Semla, of
Masreca.

36:37. And he being dead, Saul, of the river Rohoboth, reigned in his
stead.

36:38. And when he also was dead, Balanan, the son of Achobor, succeeded
to the kingdom.

36:39. This man also being dead, Adar reigned in his place; and the name
of his city was Phau: and his wife was called Meetabel, the daughter of
Matred, daughter of Mezaab.

36:40. And these are the names of the dukes of Esau in their kindreds,
and places, and callings: duke Thamna, duke Alva, duke Jetheth,

36:41. Duke Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phinon,

36:42. Duke Cenez, duke Theman, duke Mabsar,

36:43. Duke Magdiel, duke Hiram: these are the dukes of Edom dwelling in
the land of their government; the same is Esau, the father of the
Edomites.

Genesis Chapter 37

Joseph's dreams: he is sold by his brethren, and carried into Egypt.

37:1. And Jacob dwelt in the land of Chanaan, wherein his father
sojourned.

37:2. And these are his generations: Joseph, when he was sixteen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren, being but a boy: and he
was with the sons of Bala and of Zelpha his father's wives: and he
accused his brethren to his father of a most wicked crime.

37:3. Now Israel loved Joseph above all his sons, because he had him in
his old age: and he made him a coat of divers colours.

37:4. And his brethren seeing that he was loved by his father, more than
all his sons, hated hem, and could not speak peaceably to him.

37:5. Now it fell out also that he told his brethren a dream, that he
had dreamed: which occasioned them to hate him the more.

A dream... These dreams of Joseph were prophetical, and sent from God;
as were also those which he interpreted, Gen. 40. and 41.; otherwise
generally speaking, the observing of dreams is condemned in the
Scripture, as superstitious and sinful. See Deut. 18.10; Eccli. 34.2,3.

37:6. And he said to them: Hear my dream which I dreamed.

37:7. I thought we were binding sheaves in the field: and my sheaf arose
as it were, and stood, and your sheaves standing about bowed down before
my sheaf.

37:8. His brethren answered: Shalt thou be our king? or shall we be
subject to thy dominion? Therefore this matter of his dreams and words
ministered nourishment to their envy and hatred.

37:9. He dreamed also another dream, which he told his brethren, saying:
I saw in a dream, as it were the sun, and the moon, and eleven stars
worshipping me.

37:10. And when he had told this to his father, and brethren, his father
rebuked him and said: What meaneth this dream that thou hast dreamed?
shall I and thy mother, and thy brethren worship thee upon the earth?

Worship... This word is not used here to signify divine worship, but an
inferior veneration, expressed by the bowing of the body, and that,
according to the manner of the eastern nations, down to the ground.

37:11. His brethren therefore envied him: but his father considered the
thing with himself.

37:12. And when his brethren abode in Sechem, feeding their father's
flocks,

37:13. Israel said to him: Thy brethren feed the sheep in Sichem: come,
I will send thee to them. And when he answered:

37:14. I am ready: he said to him: Go, and see if all things be well
with thy brethren, and the cattle: and bring me word again what is
doing. So being sent from the vale of Hebron, he came to Sichem:

37:15. And a man found him there wandering in the field, and asked what
he sought.

37:16. But he answered: I seek my brethren, tell me where they feed the
flocks.

37:17. And the man said to him: They are departed from this place: for I
heard them say: Let us go to Dothain. And Joseph went forward after his
brethren, and found them in Dothain.

37:18. And when they saw him afar off, before he came nigh them, they
thought to kill him:

37:19. And said one to another: Behold the dreamer cometh.

37:20. Come, let us kill him, and cast him into some old pit: and we
will say: Some evil beast hath devoured him: and then it shall appear
what his dreams avail him:

37:21. And Ruben hearing this, endeavoured to deliver him out of their
hands, and said:

37:22. Do not take away his life, nor shed his blood: but cast him into
this pit, that is in the wilderness, and keep your hands harmless: now
he said this, being desirous to deliver him out of their hands and to
restore him to his father.

37:23. And as soon as he came to his brethren, they forthwith stript him
of his outside coat, that was of divers colours:

37:24. And cast him into an old pit where there was not water.

37:25. And sitting down to eat bread, they saw some Ismaelites on their
way coming from Galaad, with their camels, carrying spices, and balm,
and myrrh to Egypt.

37:26. And Juda said to his brethren: What will it profit us to kill our
brother, and conceal his blood?

37:27. It is better that he be sold to the Ismaelites, and that our
hands be not defiled: for he is our brother and our flesh. His brethren
agreed to his words.

37:28. And when the Madianite merchants passed by, they drew him out of
the pit, and sold him to the Ismaelites, for twenty pieces of silver:
and they led him into Egypt.

37:29. And Ruben returning to the pit, found not the boy:

37:30. And rending his garments he went to his brethren, and said: The
boy doth not appear, and whither shall I go?

37:31. And they took his coat, and dipped it in the blood of a kid,
which they had killed:

37:32. Sending some to carry it to their father, and to say: This we
have found: see whether it be thy son's coat, or not.

37:33. And the father acknowledging it, said: It is my son's coat, an
evil wild beast hath eaten him, a beast hath devoured Joseph.

37:34. And tearing his garments, he put on sackcloth, mourning for his
son a long time.

37:35. And all his children being gathered together to comfort their
father in his sorrow, he would not receive comfort, but said: I will go
down to my son into hell, mourning. And whilst he continued weeping,

Into hell... That is, into limbo, the place where the souls of the just
were received before the death of our Redeemer. For allowing that the
word hell sometimes is taken for the grave, it cannot be so taken in
this place; since Jacob did not believe his son to be in the grave,
(whom he supposed to be devoured by a wild beast,) and therefore could
not mean to go down to him thither: but certainly meant the place of
rest where he believed his soul to be.

37:36. The Madianites sold Joseph in Egypt to Putiphar, an eunuch of
Pharao, captain of the soldiers.

An eunuch... This word sometimes signifies a chamberlain, courtier, or
officer of the king: and so it is taken in this place.

Genesis Chapter 38

The sons of Juda: the death of Her and Onan: the birth of Phares and
Zara.

38:1. At that time Juda went down from his brethren, and turned in to a
certain Odollamite, named Hiras.

38:2. And he saw there the daughter of a man of Chanaan, called Sue: and
taking her to wife, he went in unto her.

38:3. And she conceived, and bore a son, and called his name Her.

38:4. And conceiving again, she bore a son, and called him Onan.

38:5. She bore also a third: whom she called Sela. After whose birth,
she ceased to bear any more.

38:6. And Juda took a wife for Her, his first born, whose name was
Thamar.

38:7. And Her, the first born of Juda, was wicked in the sight of the
Lord: and was slain by him.

38:8. Juda, therefore, said to Onan his son: Go in to thy brother's wife
and marry her, that thou mayst raise seed to thy brother.

38:9. He knowing that the children should not be his, when he went in to
his brother's wife, he spilled his seed upon the ground, lest children
should be born in his brother's name.

38:10. And therefore the Lord slew him, because he did a detestable
thing:

38:11. Wherefore Juda said to Thamar his daughter-in-law: Remain a widow
in thy father's house, till Sela my son grow up: for he was afraid lest
he also might die, as his brethren did. She went her way, and dwelt in
her father's house.

38:12. And after many days were past: the daughter of Sue the wife of
Juda died: and when he had taken comfort after his mourning, he went up
to Thamnas, to the shearers of his sheep, he and Hiras the Odollamite,
the shepherd of his flock.

38:13. And it was told Thamar that her father-in-law was come up to
Thamnas to shear his sheep.

38:14. And she put off the garments of her widowhood, and took a veil:
and changing her dress, sat in the cross way, that leadeth to Thamnas:
because Sela was grown up, and she had not been married to him.

38:15. When Juda saw her, he thought she was a harlot: for she had
covered her face, lest she should be known.

38:16. And going to her, he said: Suffer me to lie with thee: for he
knew her not to be his daughter-in-law. And she answered: What wilt thou
give me to enjoy my company?

38:17. He said: I will send thee a kid out of the flock. And when she
said again: I will suffer what thou wilt, if thou give me a pledge, till
thou send what thou promisest.

38:18. Juda said: What wilt thou have for a pledge? She answered: Thy
ring and bracelet, and the staff which thou holdest in thy hand. The
woman therefore at one copulation conceived.

38:19. And she arose and went her way: and putting off the apparel which
she had taken, put on the garments of her widowhood.

38:20. And Juda sent a kid by his shepherd, the Odollamite, that he
might receive the pledge again, which he had given to the woman: but he,
not finding her,

38:21. Asked the men of that place: Where is the woman that sat in the
cross way? And when they all made answer: There was no harlot in this
place,

38:22. He returned to Juda, and said to him: I have not found her;
moreover, the men of that place said to me, that there never sat a
harlot there.

38:23. Juda said: Let her take it to herself, surely she cannot charge
us with a lie, I sent the kid which I promised: and thou didst not find
her.

38:24. And behold, after three months, they told Juda, saying: Thamar,
thy daughter-in-law, hath played the harlot, and she appeareth to have a
big belly. And Juda said: Bring her out that she may be burnt.

38:25. But when she was led to execution, she sent to her father-in-law,
saying: By the man, to whom these things belong, I am with child. See
whose ring, and bracelet, and staff this is.

38:26. But he acknowledging the gifts, said: She is juster than I:
because I did not give her to Sela, my son. However he knew her no more.

38:27. And when she was ready to be brought to bed, there appeared twins
in her womb: and in the very delivery of the infants, one put forth a
hand, whereon the midwife tied a scarlet thread, saying:

38:28. This shall come forth the first.

38:29. But he drawing back his hand, the other came forth: and the woman
said: Why is the partition divided for thee? and therefore called his
name Phares.

Phares... That is, a breach or division.

38:30. Afterwards his brother came out, on whose hand was the scarlet
thread: and she called his name Zara.

Genesis Chapter 39

Joseph hath charge of his master's house: rejecteth his mistress's
solicitations: is falsely accused by her, and cast into prison, where he
hath the charge of all the prisoners.

39:1. And Joseph was brought into Egypt, and Putiphar, an eunuch of
Pharao, chief captain of the army, an Egyptian, bought him of the
Ismaelites, by whom he was brought.

39:2. And the Lord was with him, and he was a prosperous man in all
things: and he dwelt in his master's house:

39:3. Who knew very well that the Lord was with him, and made all that
he did to prosper in his hand.

39:4. And Joseph found favour in the sight of his master, and ministered
to him: and being set over all by him, he governed the house committed
to him, and all things that were delivered to him:

39:5. And the Lord blessed the house of the Egyptian for Joseph's sake,
and multiplied all his substance, both at home and in the fields.

39:6. Neither knew he any other thing, but the bread which he ate. And
Joseph was of a beautiful countenance, and comely to behold.

39:7. And after many days, his mistress cast her eyes on Joseph, and
said: Lie with me.

39:8. But he in no wise consenting to that wicked act said to her:
Behold, my master hath delivered all things to me, and knoweth not what
he hath in his own house:

39:9. Neither is there any thing which is not in my power, or that he
hath not delivered to me, but thee, who art his wife; how then can I do
this wicked thing, and sin against my God?

39:10. With such words as these day by day, both the woman was
importunate with the young man, and he refused the adultery.

39:11. Now it happened on a certain day, that Joseph went into the
house, and was doing some business, without any man with him:

39:12. And she catching the skirt of his garment, said: Lie with me. But
he leaving the garment in her hand, fled, and went out.

39:13. And when the woman saw the garment in her hands, and herself
disregarded,

39:14. She called to her the men of her house, and said to them: See, he
hath brought in a Hebrew, to abuse us: he came in to me, to lie with me;
and when I cried out,

39:15. And he heard my voice, he left the garment that I held, and got
him out.

39:16. For a proof therefore of her fidelity, she kept the garment, and
shewed it to her husband when he returned home:

A proof of her fidelity... or an argument to gain credit, argumentum
fidei.

39:17. And said: The Hebrew servant, whom thou hast brought, came to me
to abuse me.

39:18. And when he heard me cry, he left the garment which I held, and
fled out.

39:19. His master hearing these things, and giving too much credit to
his wife's words, was very angry,

39:20. And cast Joseph into the prison, where the king's prisoners were
kept, and he was there shut up.

39:21. But the Lord was with Joseph, and having mercy upon him gave him
favour in the sight of the chief keeper of the prison:

39:22. Who delivered into his hand all the prisoners that were kept in
custody: and whatsoever was done, was under him.

39:23. Neither did he himself know any thing, having committed all
things to him: for the Lord was with him, and made all that he did to
prosper.

Genesis Chapter 40

Joseph interpreteth the dreams of two of Pharao's servants in prison:
the event declareth the interpretations to be true, but Joseph is
forgotten.

40:1. After this, it came to pass, that two eunuchs, the butler and the
baker of the king of Egypt, offended their lord.

40:2. And Pharao being angry with them, (now the one was chief butler,
the other chief baker,)

40:3. He sent them to the prison of the commander of the soldiers, in
which Joseph also was prisoner.

40:4. But the keeper of the prison delivered them to Joseph, and he
served them. Some little time passed, and they were kept in custody.

40:5. And they both dreamed a dream the same night, according to the
interpretation agreeing to themselves:

40:6. And when Joseph was come into them in the morning, and saw them
sad,

40:7. He asked them, saying: Why is your countenance sadder today than
usual?

40:8. They answered: We have dreamed a dream, and there is nobody to
interpret it to us. And Joseph said to them: Doth not interpretation
belong to God? Tell me what you have dreamed:

Doth not interpretation belong to God?... When dreams are from God, as
these were, the interpretation of them is a gift of God. But the
generality of dreams are not of this sort; but either proceed from the
natural complexions and dispositions of persons, or the roving of their
imaginations in the day on such objects as they are much affected with,
or from their mind being disturbed with cares and troubles, and
oppressed with bodily infirmities: or they are suggested by evil
spirits, to flatter, or to terrify weak minds, in order to gain belief,
and so draw them into error or superstition; or at least to trouble them
in their sleep, whom they cannot move when they are awake: so that the
general rule, with regard to dreams, is not to observe them, nor to give
any credit to them.

40:9. The chief butler first told his dream: I saw before me a vine,

40:10. On which were three branches, which by little and little sent out
buds, and after the blossoms brought forth ripe grapes:

40:11. And the cup of Pharao was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and
pressed them into the cup which I held, and I gave the cup to Pharao.

40:12. Joseph answered: This is the interpretation of the dream: The
three branches, are yet three days:

40:13. After which Pharao will remember thy service, and will restore
thee to thy former place: and thou shalt present him the cup according
to thy office, as before thou was wont to do.

40:14. Only remember me when it shall be well with thee, and do me this
kindness: to put Pharao in mind to take me out of this prison:

40:15. For I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here
without any fault was cast into the dungeon.

40:16. The chief baker seeing that he had wisely interpreted the dream,
said: I also dreamed a dream, That I had three baskets of meal upon my
head:

40:17. And that in one basket which was uppermost, I carried all meats
that are made by the art of baking, and that the birds ate out of it.

40:18. Joseph answered: This is the interpretation of the dream: The
three baskets, are yet three days:

40:19. After which Pharao will take thy head from thee, and hang thee on
a cross, and the birds shall tear thy flesh.

40:20. The third day after this was the birthday of Pharao: and he made
a great feast for his servants, and at the banquet remembered the chief
butler, and the chief baker.

40:21. And he restored the one to his place, to present him the cup:

40:22. The other he hanged on a gibbet, that the truth of the
interpreter might be shewn.

40:23. But the chief butler, when things prospered with him, forgot his
interpreter.

Genesis Chapter 41

Joseph interpreteth the two dreams of Pharao: he is made ruler over all
Egypt.

41:1. After two years Pharao had a dream. He thought he stood by the
river,

41:2. Out of which came up seven kine, very beautiful and fat: and they
fed in marshy places.

41:3. Other seven also came up out of the river, ill-favoured, and lean
fleshed: and they fed on the very bank of the river, in green places:

41:4. And they devoured them, whose bodies were very beautiful and well
conditioned. So Pharao awoke.

41:5. He slept again, and dreamed another dream: Seven ears of corn came
up upon one stalk full and fair:

41:6. Then seven other ears sprung up thin and blasted,

41:7. And devoured all the beauty of the former. Pharao awaked after his
rest:

41:8. And when morning was come, being struck with fear, he sent to all
the interpreters of Egypt, and to all the wise men: and they being
called for, he told them his dream, and there was not any one that could
interpret it.

41:9. Then at length the chief butler remembering, said: I confess my
sin:

41:10. The king being angry with his servants, commanded me and the
chief baker to be cast into the prison of the captain of the soldiers.

41:11. Where in one night both of us dreamed a dream foreboding things to
come.

41:12. There was there a young man a Hebrew, servant to the same captain
of the soldiers: to whom we told our dreams,

41:13. And we heard what afterwards the event of the thing proved to be
so. For I was restored to my office: and he was hanged upon a gibbet.

41:14. Forthwith at the king's command Joseph was brought out of the
prison, and they shaved him: and changing his apparel brought him in to
him.

41:15. And he said to him: I have dreamed dreams, and there is no one
that can expound them: Now I have heard that thou art very wise at
interpreting them:

41:16. Joseph answered: Without me, God shall give Pharao a prosperous
answer.

41:17. So Pharao told what he had dreamed: Methought I stood upon the
bank of the river,

41:18. And seven kine came up out of the river, exceeding beautiful and
full of flesh: and they grazed on green places in a marshy pasture.

41:19. And behold, there followed these, other seven kine, so very ill-
favoured and lean, that I never saw the like in the land of Egypt:

41:20. And they devoured and consumed the former,

41:21. And yet gave no mark of their being full: but were as lean and
ill-favoured as before. I awoke, and then fell asleep again,

41:22. And dreamed a dream: Seven ears of corn grew up upon one stalk,
full and very fair.

41:23. Other seven also thin and blasted, sprung of the stalk:

41:24. And they devoured the beauty of the former: I told this dream to
the conjecturers, and there is no man that can expound it.

41:25. Joseph answered: The king's dream is one: God hath shewn to
Pharao what he is about to do.

41:26. The seven beautiful kine, and the seven full ears, are seven
years of plenty: and both contain the same meaning of the dream.

41:27. And the seven lean and thin kine that came up after them, and the
seven thin ears that were blasted with the burning wind, are seven years
of famine to come:

41:28. Which shall be fulfilled in this order.

41:29. Behold, there shall come seven years of great plenty in the whole
land of Egypt:

41:30. After which shall follow other seven years of so great scarcity,
that all the abundance before shall be forgotten: for the famine shall
consume all the land,

41:31. And the greatness of the scarcity shall destroy the greatness of
the plenty.

41:32. And for that thou didst see the second time a dream pertaining to
the same thing: it is a token of the certainty, and that the word of God
cometh to pass, and is fulfilled speedily.

41:33. Now therefore let the king provide a wise and industrious man,
and make him ruler over the land of Egypt:

41:34. That he may appoint overseers over all the countries: and gather
into barns the fifth part of the fruits, during the seven fruitful
years,

41:35. That shall now presently ensue: and let all the corn be laid up,
under Pharao's hands, and be reserved in the cities.

41:36. And let it be in readiness, against the famine of seven years to
come, which shall oppress Egypt, and the land shall not be consumed with
scarcity.

41:37. The counsel pleased Pharao, and all his servants.

41:38. And he said to them: Can we find such another man, that is full
of the spirit of God?

41:39. He said therefore to Joseph: Seeing God hath shewn thee all that
thou hast said, can I find one wiser and one like unto thee?

41:40. Thou shalt be over my house, and at the commandment of thy mouth
all the people shall obey: only in the kingly throne will I be above
thee.

41:41. And again Pharao said to Joseph: Behold, I have appointed thee
over the whole land of Egypt.

41:42. And he took his ring from his own hand, and gave it into his
hand: and he put upon him a robe of silk, and put a chain of gold about
his neck.

41:43. And he made him go up into his second chariot, the crier
proclaiming that all should bow their knee before him, and that they
should know he was made governor over the whole land of Egypt.

41:44. And the king said to Joseph: I am Pharao: without thy commandment
no man shall move hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.

41:45. And he turned his name, and called him in the Egyptian tongue the
saviour of the world. And he gave him to wife Aseneth, the daughter of
Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis. Then Joseph went out to the land of
Egypt.

The saviour of the world... Zaphnah paaneah.

41:46. (Now he was thirty years old when he stood before king Pharao),
and he went round all the countries of Egypt.

41:47. And the fruitfulness of the seven years came: and the corn being
bound up into sheaves, was gathered together into the barns of Egypt.

41:48. And all the abundance of grain was laid up in every city.

41:49. And there was so great abundance of wheat, that it was equal to
the sand of the sea, and the plenty exceeded measure.

41:50. And before the famine came, Joseph had two sons born: whom
Aseneth, the daughter of Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis, bore unto him.

41:51. And he called the name of the firstborn Manasses, saying: God
hath made me to forget all my labours, and my father's house.

Manasses... That is, oblivion, or forgetting.

41:52. And he named the second Ephraim, saying: God hath made me to grow
in the land of my poverty.

Ephraim... That is, fruitful, or growing.

41:53. Now when the seven years of plenty that had been in Egypt were
passed:

41:54. The seven years of scarcity, which Joseph had foretold, began to
come: and the famine prevailed in the whole world, but there was bread
in all the land of Egypt.

41:55. And when there also they began to be famished, the people cried
to Pharao, for food. And he said to them: Go to Joseph: and do all that
he shall say to you.

41:56. And the famine increased daily in all the land: and Joseph opened
all the barns, and sold to the Egyptians: for the famine had oppressed
them also.

41:57. And all provinces came into Egypt, to buy food, and to seek some
relief of their want.

Genesis Chapter 42

Jacob sendeth his ten sons to buy corn in Egypt. Their treatment by
Joseph.

42:1. And Jacob hearing that food was sold in Egypt, said to his sons:
Why are ye careless?

42:2. I have heard that wheat is sold in Egypt: Go ye down, and buy us
necessaries, that we may live, and not be consumed with want.

42:3. So the ten brethren of Joseph went down, to buy corn in Egypt:

42:4. Whilst Benjamin was kept at home by Jacob, who said to his
brethren: Lest perhaps he take any harm in the journey.

42:5. And they entered into the land of Egypt with others that went to
buy. For the famine was in the land of Chanaan.

42:6. And Joseph was governor in the land of Egypt, and corn was sold by
his direction to the people. And when his brethren had bowed down to
him,

42:7. And he knew them, he spoke as it were to strangers, somewhat
roughly, asking them: Whence came you? They answered: From the land of
Chanaan, to buy necessaries of life.

42:8. And though he knew his brethren, he was not known by them.

42:9. And remembering the dreams, which formerly he had dreamed, he said
to them: You are spies. You are come to view the weaker parts of the
land.

You are spies... This he said by way of examining them, to see what they
would answer.

42:10. But they said: It is not so, my lord; but thy servants are come
to buy food.

42:11. We are all the sons of one man: we are come as peaceable men,
neither do thy servants go about any evil.

42:12. And he answered them: It is otherwise: you are come to consider
the unfenced parts of this land.

42:13. But they said: We thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of
one man in the land of Chanaan: the youngest is with our father, the
other is not living.

42:14. He saith, This is it that I said: You are spies.

42:15. I shall now presently try what you are: by the health of Pharao,
you shall not depart hence, until your youngest brother come.

42:16. Send one of you to fetch him: and you shall be in prison, till
what you have said be proved, whether it be true or false: or else by
the health of Pharao you are spies.

Or else by the health of Pharao you are spies... That is, if these
things you say be proved false, you are to be held for spies for your
lying, and shall be treated as such. Joseph dealt in this manner with
his brethren, to bring them by the means of affliction to a sense of
their former sin, and a sincere repentance for it.

42:17. So he put them in prison three days.

42:18. And the third day he brought them out of prison, and said: Do as
I have said, and you shall live: for I fear God.

42:19. If you be peaceable men, let one of your brethren be bound in
prison: and go ye your ways, and carry the corn that you have bought,
unto your houses.

42:20. And bring your youngest brother to me, that I may find your words
to be true, and you may not die. They did as he had said.

42:21. And they talked one to another: We deserve to suffer these
things, because we have sinned against our brother, seeing the anguish
of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is
this affliction come upon us.

42:22. And Ruben, one of them, said: Did not I say to you: Do not sin
against the boy; and you would not hear me? Behold his blood is
required.

42:23. And they knew not that Joseph understood, because he spoke to
them by an interpreter.

42:24. And he turned himself away a little while, and wept: and
returning, he spoke to them.

42:25. And taking Simeon, and binding him in their presence, he
commanded his servants to fill their sacks with wheat, and to put every
man's money again in their sacks, and to give them besides provisions
for the way: and they did so.

42:26. But they having loaded their asses with the corn went their way.

42:27. And one of them opening his sack, to give his beast provender in
the inn, saw the money in the sack's mouth,

42:28. And said to his brethren: My money is given me again; behold it
is in the sack. And they were astonished, and troubled, and said to one
another: What is this that God hath done unto us?

42:29. And they came to Jacob their father in the land of Chanaan, and
they told him all things that had befallen them, saying:

42:30. The lord of the land spoke roughly to us, and took us to be spies
of the country.

42:31. And we answered him: We are peaceable men, and we mean no plot.

42:32. We are twelve brethren born of one father: one is not living, the
youngest is with our father in the land of Chanaan.

42:33. And he said to us: Hereby shall I know that you are peaceable
men: Leave one of your brethren with me, and take ye necessary provision
for your houses, and go your ways,

42:34. And bring your youngest brother to me, that I may know you are
not spies: and you may receive this man again, that is kept in prison:
and afterwards may have leave to buy what you will.

42:35. When they had told this, they poured out their corn, and every
man found his money tied in the mouth of his sack: and all being
astonished together,

42:36. Their father Jacob said: You have made me to be without children:
Joseph is not living, Simeon is kept in bonds, and Benjamin you will
take away: all these evils are fallen upon me.

42:37. And Ruben answered him: Kill my two sons, if I bring him not
again to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will restore him to thee.

42:38. But he said: My son shall not go down with you: his brother is
dead, and he is left alone: if any mischief befall him in the land to
which you go, you will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow to hell.

To hell... That is, to that place, where the souls then remained, as
above, chapter 37. ver. 35.

Genesis Chapter 43

The sons of Jacob go again into Egypt with Benjamin. They are
entertained by Joseph.

43:1. In the mean time the famine was heavy upon all the land.

43:2. And when they had eaten up all the corn, which they had brought
out of Egypt, Jacob said to his sons: Go again, and buy us a little
food.

43:3. Juda answered: The man declared unto us with the attestation of an
oath, saying: You shall not see my face, unless you bring your youngest
brother with you.

43:4. If therefore thou wilt send him with us, we will set out together,
and will buy necessaries for thee.

43:5. But if thou wilt not, we will not go: for the man, as we have
often said, declared unto us, saying: You shall not see my face without
your youngest brother.

43:6. Israel said to them: You have done this for my misery, in that you
told him you had also another brother.

43:7. But they answered: The man asked us in order concerning our
kindred: if our father lived: if we had a brother: and we answered him
regularly, according to what he demanded: could we know that he would
say: Bring hither your brother with you?

43:8. And Juda said to his father: Send the boy with me, that we may set
forward, and may live: lest both we and our children perish.

43:9. I take the boy upon me, require him at my hand: unless I bring him
again, and restore him to thee, I will be guilty of sin against thee for
ever.

43:10. If delay had not been made, we had been here again the second
time.

43:11. Then Israel said to them: If it must needs be so, do what you
will: take of the best fruits of the land in your vessels, and carry
down presents to the man, a little balm, and honey, and storax, myrrh,
turpentine, and almonds.

Balm... Literally rosin, resinae; but here by that name is meant balm.

43:12. And take with you double money, and carry back what you found in
your sacks, lest perhaps it was done by mistake.

43:13. And take also your brother, and go to the man.

43:14. And may my almighty God make him favourable to you: and send back
with you your brother, whom he keepeth, and this Benjamin: and as for me
I shall be desolate without children.

43:15. So the men took the presents, and double money, and Benjamin: and
went down into Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

43:16. And when he had seen them, and Benjamin with them, he commanded
the steward of his house, saying: Bring in the men into the house, and
kill victims, and prepare a feast: because they shall eat with me at
noon.

43:17. He did as he was commanded, and brought the men into the house.

43:18. And they being much afraid, said there one to another: Because of
the money, which we carried back the first time in our sacks, we are
brought in: that he may bring upon us a false accusation, and by
violence make slaves of us and our asses.

43:19. Wherefore, going up to the steward of the house, at the door,

43:20. They said: Sir, we desire thee to hear us. We came down once
before to buy food:

43:21. And when we had bought, and were come to the inn, we opened our
sacks, and found our money in the mouths of the sacks: which we have now
brought again in the same weight.

43:22. And we have brought other money besides, to buy what we want: we
cannot tell who put it in our bags.

43:23. But he answered: Peace be with you, fear not: your God, and the
God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks. For the
money, which you gave me, I have for good. And he brought Simeon out to
them.

43:24. And having brought them into the house, he fetched water, and
they washed their feet, and he gave provender to their asses.

43:25. But they made ready the presents, against Joseph came at noon:
for they had heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26. Then Joseph came in to his house, and they offered him the
presents, holding them in their hands; and they bowed down with their
face to the ground.

43:27. But he courteously saluting them again, asked them, saying: Is
the old man your father in health, of whom you told me? Is he yet
living?

43:28. And they answered: Thy servant our father, is in health; he is
yet living. And bowing themselves, they made obeisance to him.

43:29. And Joseph lifting up his eyes, saw Benjamin, his brother by the
same mother, and said: Is this your young brother, of whom you told me?
And he said: God be gracious to thee, my son.

43:30. And he made haste, because his heart was moved upon his brother,
and tears gushed out: and going into his chamber, he wept.

43:31. And when he had washed his face, coming out again, he refrained
himself, and said: Set bread on the table.

43:32. And when it was set on, for Joseph apart, and for his brethren
apart, for the Egyptians also that ate with him apart, (for it is
unlawful for the Egyptians to eat with the Hebrews, and they think such
a feast profane):

43:33. They sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
and the youngest according to his age. And they wondered very much;

43:34. Taking the messes which they received of him: and the greater
mess came to Benjamin, so that it exceeded by five parts. And they
drank, and were merry with him.

Genesis Chapter 44

Joseph's contrivance to stop his brethren. The humble supplication of
Juda.

44:1. And Joseph commanded the steward of his house, saying: Fill their
sacks with corn, as much as they can hold: and put the money of every
one in the top of his sack.

44:2. And in the mouth of the younger's sack put my silver cup, and the
price which he gave for the wheat. And it was so done.

44:3. And when the morning arose, they were sent away with their asses.

44:4. And when they were now departed out of the city, and had gone
forward a little way: Joseph sending for the steward of his house, said:
Arise, and pursue after the men: and when thou hast overtaken them, say
to them: Why have you returned evil for good?

44:5. The cup which you have stolen, is that in which my lord drinketh,
and in which he is wont to divine: you have done a very evil thing.

44:6. He did as he had commanded him. And having overtaken them, he
spoke to them the same words.

44:7. And they answered: Why doth our lord speak so, as though thy
servants had committed so heinous a fact?

44:8. The money, that we found in the top of our sacks, we brought back
to thee from the land of Chanaan: how then should it be that we should
steal out of thy lord's house, gold or silver?

44:9. With whomsoever of thy servants shall be found that which thou
seekest, let him die, and we will be the bondmen of my lord.

44:10. And he said to them: Let it be according to your sentence: with
whomsoever it shall be found, let him be my servant, and you shall be
blameless.

44:11. Then they speedily took down their sacks to the ground, and every
man opened his sack.

44:12. Which when he had searched, beginning at the eldest, and ending
at the youngest, he found the cup in Benjamin's sack.

44:13. Then they rent their garments, and loading their asses again,
returned into the town.

44:14. And Juda at the head of his brethren went in to Joseph (for he
was not yet gone out of the place) and they all together fell down
before him on the ground.

44:15. And he said to them: Why would you do so? know you not that there
is no one like me in the science of divining.

The science of divining... He speaks of himself according to what he was
esteemed in that kingdom. And indeed, he being truly a prophet, knew
more without comparison than any of the Egyptian sorcerers.

44:16. And Juda said to him: What shall we answer my lord? or what shall
we say, or be able justly to allege? God hath found out the iniquity of
thy servants: behold, we are all bondmen to my lord, both we, and he
with whom the cup was found.

44:17. Joseph answered: God forbid that I should do so: he that stole
the cup, he shall be my bondman: and go you away free to your father.

44:18. Then Juda coming nearer, said boldly: I beseech thee, my lord,
let thy servant speak a word in thy ears, and be not angry with thy
servant: for after Pharao thou art.

44:19. My lord. Thou didst ask thy servants the first time: Have you a
father or a brother.

44:20. And we answered thee, my lord: We have a father an old man, and a
young boy, that was born in his old age; whose brother by the mother is
dead; and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him
tenderly.

44:21. And thou saidst to thy servants: Bring him hither to me, and I
will set my eyes on him.

44:22. We suggested to my lord: The boy cannot leave his father: for if
he leave him, he will die.

44:23. And thou saidst to thy servants: Except your youngest brother
come with you, you shall see my face no more.

44:24. Therefore when we were gone up to thy servant our father, we told
him all that my lord had said.

44:25. And our father said: Go again, and buy us a little wheat.

44:26. And we said to him: We cannot go: if our youngest brother go down
with us, we will set out together: otherwise, without him we dare not
see the man's face.

44:27. Whereunto he answered: You know that my wife bore me two.

44:28. One went out, and you said: A beast devoured him; and hitherto he
appeareth not.

44:29. If you take this also, and any thing befall him in the way, you
will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow unto hell.

44:30. Therefore, if I shall go to thy servant, our father, and the boy
be wanting, (whereas his life dependeth upon the life of him,)

44:31. And he shall see that he is not with us, he will die, and thy
servants shall bring down his grey hairs with sorrow unto hell.

His gray hairs... That is, his person, now far advanced in years.-With
sorrow unto hell... The Hebrew word for hell is here sheol, the Greek
hades: it is not taken for the hell of the damned; but for that place of
souls below where the servants of God were kept before the coming of
Christ. Which place, both in the Scripture and in the creed, is named
hell.

44:32. Let me be thy proper servant, who took him into my trust, and
promised, saying: If I bring him not again, I will be guilty of sin
against my father for ever.

44:33. Therefore I, thy servant, will stay instead of the boy in the
service of my lord, and let the boy go up with his brethren.

44:34. For I cannot return to my father without the boy, lest I be a
witness of the calamity that will oppress my father.

Genesis Chapter 45

Joseph maketh himself known to his brethren: and sendeth for his father.

45:1. Joseph could no longer refrain himself before many that stood by:
whereupon he commanded that all should go out, and no stranger be
present at their knowing one another.

45:2. And he lifted up his voice with weeping, which the Egyptians, and
all the house of Pharao heard.

45:3. And he said to his brethren: I am Joseph: Is my father yet living?
His brethren could not answer him, being struck with exceeding great
fear.

45:4. And he said mildly to them: Come nearer to me. And when they were
come near him, he said: I am Joseph, your brother, whom you sold into
Egypt.

45:5. Be not afraid, and let it not seem to you a hard case that you
sold me into these countries: for God sent me before you into Egypt for
your preservation.

45:6. For it is two years since the famine began to be upon the land,
and five years more remain, wherein there can be neither ploughing nor
reaping.

45:7. And God sent me before, that you may be preserved upon the earth,
and may have food to live.

45:8. Not by your counsel was I sent hither, but by the will of God: who
hath made me as it were a father to Pharao, and lord of his whole house,
and governor in all the land of Egypt.

45:9. Make haste, and go ye up to my father, and say to him: Thus saith
thy son Joseph: God hath made me lord of the whole land of Egypt; come
down to me, linger not.

45:10. And thou shalt dwell in the land of Gessen: and thou shalt be
near me, thou and thy sons, and thy sons' sons, thy sheep, and thy
herds, and all things that thou hast.

45:11. And there I will feed thee, (for there are yet five years of
famine remaining) lest both thou perish, and thy house, and all things
that thou hast.

45:12. Behold, your eyes, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, see that
it is my mouth that speaketh to you.

45:13. You shall tell my father of all my glory, and all things that you
have seen in Egypt: make haste and bring him to me.

45:14. And falling upon the neck of his brother Benjamin, he embraced
him and wept: and Benjamin in like manner wept also on his neck.

45:15. And Joseph kissed all his brethren, and wept upon every one of
them: after which they were emboldened to speak to him.

45:16. And it was heard, and the fame was spread abroad in the king's
court: The brethren of Joseph are come; and Pharao with all his family
was glad.

45:17. And he spoke to Joseph that he should give orders to his
brethren, saying: Load your beasts, and go into the land of Chanaan,

45:18. And bring away from thence your father and kindred, and come to
me; and I will give you all the good things of Egypt, that you may eat
the marrow of the land.

45:19. Give orders also that they take wagons out of the land of Egypt,
for the carriage of their children and their wives; and say: Take up
your father, and make haste to come with all speed:

45:20. And leave nothing of your household stuff; for all the riches of
Egypt shall be yours.

45:21. And the sons of Israel did as they were bid. And Joseph gave them
wagons according to Pharao's commandment: and provisions for the way.

45:22. He ordered also to be brought out for every one of them two
robes: but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, with five
robes of the best:

45:23. Sending to his father as much money and raiment; adding besides,
ten he-asses, to carry off all the riches of Egypt, and as many she-
asses, carrying wheat and bread for the journey.

45:24. So he sent away his brethren, and at their departing said to
them: Be not angry in the way.

45:25. And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Chanaan,
to their father Jacob.

45:26. And they told him, saying: Joseph, thy son, is living; and he is
ruler in all the land of Egypt. Which when Jacob heard, he awaked as it
were out of a deep sleep, yet did not believe them.

45:27. They, on the other side, told the whole order of the thing. And
when he saw the wagons, and all that he had sent, his spirit revived,

45:28. And he said: It is enough for me if Joseph, my son, be yet
living: I will go and see him before I die.

Genesis Chapter 46

Israel, waranted by a vision from God, goeth down into Egypt with all
his family.

46:1. And Israel taking his journey, with all that he had, came to the
well of the oath, and killing victims there to the God of his father
Isaac,

The well of the oath... Bersabee.

46:2. He heard him, by a vision in the night, calling him, and saying to
him: Jacob, Jacob. And he answered him: Lo, here I am.

46:3. God said to him: I am the most mighty God of thy father; fear not,
go down into Egypt, for I will make a great nation of thee there.

46:4. I will go down with thee thither, and will bring thee back again
from thence: Joseph also shall put his hands upon thy eyes.

46:5. And Jacob rose up from the well of the oath: and his sons took him
up, with their children and wives in the wagons, which Pharao had sent
to carry the old man,

46:6. And all that he had in the land of Chanaan: and he came into Egypt
with all his seed;

46:7. His sons, and grandsons, daughters, and all his offspring
together.

46:8. And these are the names of the children of Israel, that entered
into Egypt, he and his children. His firstborn Ruben,

46:9. The sons of Ruben: Henoch and Phallu, and Hesron and Charmi.

46:10. The sons of Simeon: Jamuel and Jamin and Ahod, and Jachin and
Sohar, and Saul, the son of a woman of Chanaan.

46:11. The sons of Levi: Gerson and Caath, and Merari.

46:12. The sons of Juda: Her and Onan, and Sela, and Phares and Zara.
And Her and Onan died in the land of Chanaan. And sons were born to
Phares: Hesron and Hamul.

46:13. The sons of Issachar: Thola and Phua, and Job and Semron.

46:14. The sons of Zabulon: Sared, and Elon, and Jahelel.

46:15. These are the sons of Lia, whom she bore in Mesopotamia of Syria,
with Dina, his daughter. All the souls of her sons and daughters,
thirty-three.

46:16. The sons of Gad: Sephion and Haggi, and Suni and Esebon, and Heri
and Arodi, and Areli.

46:17. The sons of Aser: Jamne and Jesua, and Jessuri and Beria, and
Sara their sister. The sons of Beria: Heber and Melchiel.

46:18. These are the sons of Zelpha, whom Laban gave to Lia, his
daughter. And these she bore to Jacob, sixteen souls.

46:19. The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.

46:20. And sons were born to Joseph, in the land of Egypt, whom Aseneth,
the daughter of Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis, bore him: Manasses and
Ephraim.

46:21. The sons of Benjamin: Bela and Bechor, and Asbel and Gera, and
Naaman and Echi, and Ross and Mophim, and Ophim and Ared.

46:22. These are the sons of Rachel, whom she bore to Jacob: all the
souls, fourteen.

46:23. The sons of Dan: Husim.

46:24. The sons of Nephthali: Jaziel and Guni, and Jeser and Sallem.

46:25. These are the sons of Bala, whom Laban gave to Rachel, his
daughter: and these she bore to Jacob: all the souls, seven.

46:26. All the souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, and that came out
of his thigh, besides his sons' wives, sixty-six.

46:27. And the sons of Joseph, that were born to him in the land of
Egypt, two souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob, that entered into
Egypt, were seventy.

46:28. And he sent Juda before him to Joseph, to tell him; and that he
should meet him in Gessen.

46:29. And when he was come thither, Joseph made ready his chariot, and
went up to meet his father in the same place: and seeing him, he fell
upon his neck, and embracing him, wept.

46:30. And the father said to Joseph: Now shall I die with joy, because
I have seen thy face, and leave thee alive.

46:31. And Joseph said to his brethren, and to all his father's house: I
will go up, and will tell Pharao, and will say to him: My brethren, and
my father's house, that were in the land of Chanaan, are come to me:

46:32. And the men are shepherds, and their occupation is to feed
cattle; their flocks, and herds, and all they have, they have brought
with them.

46:33. And when he shall call you, and shall say: What is your
occupation?

46:34. You shall answer: We, thy servants, are shepherds, from our
infancy until now, both we and our fathers. And this you shall say, that
you may dwell in the land of Gessen, because the Egyptians have all
shepherds in abomination.

Genesis Chapter 47

Jacob and his sons are presented before Pharao: he giveth them the land
of Gessen. The famine forceth the Egyptians to sell all their
possessions to the king.

47:1. Then Joseph went in and told Pharao, saying: My father and
brethren, their sheep and their herds, and all that they possess, are
come out of the land of Chanaan: and behold they stay in the land of
Gessen.

47:2. Five men also, the last of his brethren, he presented before the
king:

The last...Extremos. Some interpret this word of the chiefest, and most
rightly: but Joseph seems rather to have chosen out such as had the
meanest appearance, that Pharao might not think of employing them at
court, with danger of their morals and religion.

47:3. And he asked them: What is your occupation? They answered: We, thy
servants, are shepherds, both we and our fathers.

47:4. We are come to sojourn in thy land, because there is no grass for
the flocks of thy servants, the famine being very grievous in the land
of Chanaan: and we pray thee to give orders that we thy servants may be
in the land of Gessen.

47:5. The king therefore said to Joseph: Thy father and thy brethren are
come to thee.

47:6. The land of Egypt is before thee: and make them dwell in the best
place, and give them the land of Gessen. And if thou knowest that there
are industrious men among them, make them rulers over my cattle.

47:7. After this Joseph brought in his father to the king, and presented
him before him: and he blessed him.

47:8. And being asked by him: How many are the days of the years of thy
life?

47:9. He answered: The days of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty
years, few, and evil, and they are not come up to the days of the
pilgrimage of my fathers.

47:10. And blessing the king, he went out.

47:11. But Joseph gave a possession to his father and his brethren in
Egypt, in the best place of the land, in Ramesses, as Pharao had
commanded.

47:12. And he nourished them, and all his father's house, allowing food
to every one.

47:13. For in the whole world there was want of bread, and a famine had
oppressed the land, more especially of Egypt and Chanaan;

47:14. Out of which he gathered up all the money for the corn which they
bought, and brought it in to the king's treasure.

47:15. And when the buyers wanted money, all Egypt came to Joseph,
saying: Give us bread: why should we die in thy presence, having now no
money?

47:16. And he answered them: Bring me your cattle, and for them I will
give you food, if you have no money.

47:17. And when they had brought them, he gave them food in exchange for
their horses, and sheep, and oxen, and asses: and he maintained them
that year for the exchange of their cattle.

47:18. And they came the second year, and said to him: We will not hide
from our lord, how that our money is spent, and our cattle also are
gone: neither art thou ignorant that we have nothing now left but our
bodies and our lands.

47:19. Why therefore shall we die before thy eyes? we will be thine,
both we and our lands: buy us to be the king's servants, and give us
seed, lest for want of tillers the land be turned into a wilderness.

47:20. So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt, every man selling his
possessions, because of the greatness of the famine. And he brought it
into Pharao's hands:

47:21. And all its people from one end of the borders of Egypt, even to
the other end thereof,

47:22. Except the land of the priests, which had been given them by the
king: to whom also a certain allowance of food was given out of the
public stores, and therefore they were not forced to sell their
possessions.

47:23. Then Joseph said to the people: Behold, as you see, both you and
your lands belong to Pharao; take seed and sow the fields,

47:24. That you may have corn. The fifth part you shall give to the
king; the other four you shall have for seed, and for food for your
families and children.

47:25. And they answered: our life is in thy hand; only let my lord look
favourably upon us, and we will gladly serve the king.

47:26. From that time unto this day, in the whole land of Egypt, the
fifth part is paid to the kings, and it is become as a law, except the
land of the priests, which was free from this covenant.

47:27. So Israel dwelt in Egypt, that is, in the land of Gessen, and
possessed it; and grew, and was multiplied exceedingly.

47:28. And he lived in it seventeen years: and all the days of his life
came to a hundred and forty-seven years.

47:29. And when he saw that the day of his death drew nigh, he called
his son Joseph, and said to him: If I have found favour in thy sight,
put thy hand under my thigh; and thou shalt shew me this kindness and
truth, not to bury me in Egypt.

47:30. But I will sleep with my fathers, and thou shalt take me away out
of this land, and bury me in the burying place of my ancestors. And
Joseph answered him: I will do what thou hast commanded.

47:31. And he said: Swear then to me. And as he was swearing, Israel
adored God, turning to the bed's head.

To the bed's head... St. Paul, Heb. 11.21, following the Greek
translation of the Septuagint, reads adored the top of his rod. Where
note, that the same word in the Hebrew, according to the different
pointing of it, signifies both a bed and a rod. And to verify both these
sentences, we must understand that Jacob leaning on Joseph's rod adored,
turning towards the head of his bed: which adoration, inasmuch as it was
referred to God, was an absolute and sovereign worship: but inasmuch as
it was referred to the rod of Joseph, as a figure of the sceptre, that
is, of the royal dignity of Christ, was only an inferior and relative
honour.

Genesis Chapter 48

Joseph visiteth his father in his sickness, who adopteth his two sons
Manasses and Ephraim, and blesseth them, preferring the younger before
the elder.

48:1. After these things, it was told Joseph that his father was sick;
and he set out to go to him, taking his two sons Manasses and Ephraim.

48:2. And it was told the old man: Behold thy son Joseph cometh to thee.
And being strengthened, he sat on his bed.

48:3. And when Joseph was come in to him, he said: God almighty
appeared to me at Luza, which is in the land of Chanaan, and he blessed
me,

48:4. And said: I will cause thee to increase and multiply, and I will
make of thee a multitude of people: and I will give this land to thee,
and to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.

48:5. So thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt before
I came hither to thee, shall be mine: Ephraim and Manasses shall be
reputed to me as Ruben and Simeon.

48:6. But the rest whom thou shalt have after them, shall be thine, and
shall be called by the name of their brethren in their possessions.

48:7. For, when I came out of Mesopotamia, Rachel died from me in the
land of Chanaan in the very journey, and it was spring time: and I was
going to Ephrata, and I buried her near the way of Ephrata, which by
another name is called Bethlehem.

48:8. Then seeing his sons, he said to him: Who are these?

48:9. He answered: They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this
place. And he said: Bring them to me, that I may bless them.

48:10. For Israel's eyes were dim by reason of his great age, and he
could not see clearly. And when they were brought to him, he kissed and
embraced them,

48:11. And said to his son: I am not deprived of seeing thee; moreover
God hath shewn me thy seed.

48:12. And when Joseph had taken them from his father's lap, he bowed
down with his face to the ground.

48:13. And he set Ephraim on his right hand, that is, towards the left
hand of Israel; but Manasses on his left hand, to wit, towards his
father's right hand, and brought them near to him.

48:14. But he, stretching forth his right hand, put it upon the head of
Ephraim, the younger brother; and the left upon the head of Manasses,
who was the elder, changing his hands.

48:15. And Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph, and said: God, in whose
sight my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, God that feedeth me from my
youth until this day:

48:16. The angel that delivereth me from all evils, bless these boys:
and let my name be called upon them, and the names of my fathers Abraham
and Isaac; and may they grow into a multitude upon the earth.

48:17. And Joseph seeing that his father had put his right hand upon the
head of Ephraim, was much displeased: and taking his father's hand, he
tried to lift it from Ephraim's head, and to remove it to the head of
Manasses.

48:18. And he said to his father: It should not be so, my father; for
this is the firstborn, put thy right hand upon his head.

48:19. But he refusing, said: I know, my son, I know: and this also
shall become a people, and shall be multiplied; but his younger brother
shall be greater than he; and his seed shall grow into nations.

48:20. And he blessed them at that time, saying: In thee shall Israel be
blessed, and it shall be said: God do to thee as to Ephraim, and as to
Manasses. And he set Ephraim before Manasses.

48:21. And he said to Joseph, his son: Behold I die, and God will be
with you, and will bring you back into the land of your fathers.

48:22. I give thee a portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the
hand of the Amorrhite with my sword and bow.

Genesis Chapter 49

Jacob's prophetical blessings of his twelve sons: his death.

49:1. And Jacob called his sons, and said to them: Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you the things that shall befall you in the
last days.

49:2. Gather yourselves together, and hear, O ye sons of Jacob, hearken
to Israel, your father:

49:3. Ruben, my firstborn, thou art my strength, and the beginning of my
sorrow; excelling in gifts, greater in command.

My strength, etc... He calls him his strength, as being born whilst his
father was in his full strength and vigour: he calls him the beginning
of his sorrow, because cares and sorrows usually come on with the birth
of children. Excelling in gifts, etc., because the firstborn had a title
to a double portion, and to have the command over his brethren, which
Ruben forfeited by his sin; being poured out as water, that is, spilt
and lost.

49:4. Thou art poured out as water, grow thou not; because thou wentest
up to thy father's bed, and didst defile his couch.

Grow thou not... This was not meant by way of a curse or imprecation;
but by way of a prophecy foretelling that the tribe of Ruben should not
inherit the pre-eminences usually annexed to the first birthright, viz.,
the double portion, the being prince or lord over the other brethren,
and the priesthood: of which the double portion was given to Joseph, the
princely office to Juda, and the priesthood to Levi.

49:5. Simeon and Levi brethren: vessels of iniquity waging war.

49:6. Let not my soul go into their counsel, nor my glory be in their
assembly: because in their fury they slew a man, and in their self-will
they undermined a wall.

Slew a man,... viz., Sichem the son of Hemor, with all his people, Gen.
34.; mystically and prophetically it alludes to Christ, whom their
posterity, viz., the priests and the scribes, put to death.

49:7. Cursed be their fury, because it was stubborn: and their wrath,
because it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and will scatter them
in Israel.

49:8. Juda, thee shall thy brethren praise: thy hand shall be on the
necks of thy enemies; the sons of thy father shall bow down to thee.

49:9. Juda is a lion's whelp: to the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
resting thou hast couched as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall rouse
him?

A lion's whelp, etc... This blessing of Juda foretelleth the strength of
his tribe, the fertility of his inheritance; and principally that the
sceptre and legislative power should not be utterly taken away from his
race till about the time of the coming of Christ: as in effect it never
was: which is a demonstration against the modern Jews, that the Messiah
is long since come; for the sceptre has long since been utterly taken
away from Juda.

49:10. The sceptre shall not be taken away from Juda, nor a ruler from
his thigh, till he come that is to be sent, and he shall be the
expectation of nations.

49:11. Tying his foal to the vineyard, and his ass, O my son, to the
vine. He shall wash his robe in wine, and his garment in the blood of
the grape.

49:12. His eyes are more beautiful than wine, and his teeth whiter than
milk.

49:13. Zabulon shall dwell on the seashore, and in the road of ships,
reaching as far as Sidon.

49:14. Issachar shall be a strong ass, lying down between the borders.

49:15. He saw rest that it was good: and the land that it was excellent:
and he bowed his shoulder to carry, and became a servant under tribute.

49:16. Dan shall judge his people like another tribe in Israel.

Dan shall judge, etc... This was verified in Samson, who was of the
tribe of Dan, and began to deliver Israel. Judges 13.5. But as this
deliverance was but temporal and very imperfect, the holy patriarch
(ver. 18) aspires after another kind of deliverer, saying: I will look
for thy salvation, O Lord.

49:17. Let Dan be a snake in the way, a serpent in the path, that biteth
the horse's heels, that his rider may fall backward.

49:18. I will look for thy salvation, O Lord.

49:19. Gad, being girded, shall fight before him: and he himself shall
be girded backward.

Gad being girded, etc... It seems to allude to the tribe of Gad; when
after they had received for their lot the land of Galaad, they marched
in arms before the rest of the Israelites, to the conquest of the land
of Chanaan: from whence they afterwards returned loaded with spoils. See
Jos. 4. and 12.

49:20. Aser, his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield dainties to
kings.

49:21. Nephthali, a hart let loose, and giving words of beauty.

49:22. Joseph is a growing son, a growing son and comely to behold: the
daughters run to and fro upon the wall;

Run to and fro, etc... To behold his beauty; whilst his envious brethren
turned their darts against him, etc.

49:23. But they that held darts, provoked him, and quarrelled with him,
and envied him.

49:24. His bow rested upon the strong, and the bands of his arms and his
hands were loosed, by the hands of the mighty one of Jacob: thence he
came forth a pastor, the stone of Israel.

His bow rested upon the strong, etc... That is, upon God, who was his
strength: who also loosed his bands, and brought him out of prison to be
the pastor, that is, the feeder and ruler of Egypt, and the stone, that
is, the rock and support of Israel.

49:25. The God of thy father shall be thy helper, and the Almighty shall
bless thee with the blessings of heaven above, with the blessings of the
deep that lieth beneath, with the blessings of the breasts and of the
womb.

49:26. The blessings of thy father are strengthened with the blessings
of his fathers: until the desire of the everlasting hills should come:
may they be upon the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of the Nazarite
among his brethren.

The blessings of thy father, etc... That is, thy father's blessings are
made more prevalent and effectual in thy regard, by the additional
strength they receive from his inheriting the blessings of his
progenitors Abraham and Isaac. The desire of the everlasting hills,
etc... These blessings all looked forward towards Christ, called the
desire of the everlasting hills, as being longed for, as it were, by the
whole creation. Mystically, the patriarchs and prophets are called the
everlasting hills, by reason of the eminence of their wisdom and
holiness. The Nazarite... This word signifies one separated; and agrees
to Joseph, as being separated from, and more eminent than, his brethren.
As the ancient Nazarites were so called from their being set aside for
God, and vowed to him.

49:27. Benjamin a ravenous wolf, in the morning shall eat the prey, and
in the evening shall divide the spoil.

49:28. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: these things their
father spoke to them, and he blessed every one with their proper
blessings.

49:29. And he charged them, saying: I am now going to be gathered to my
people: bury me with my fathers in the double cave, which is in the
field of Ephron the Hethite,

To be gathered to my people... That is, I am going to die, and so to
follow my ancestors that are gone before me, and to join their company
in another world.

49:30. Over against Mambre, in the land of Chanaan, which Abraham bought
together with the field, of Ephron the Hethite, for a possession to bury
in.

49:31. There they buried him, and Sara his wife: there was Isaac buried
with Rebecca, his wife: there also Lia doth lie buried.

49:32. And when he had ended the commandments, wherewith he instructed
his sons, he drew up his feet upon the bed, and died: and he was
gathered to his people.

Genesis Chapter 50

The mourning for Jacob, and his interment. Joseph's kindness towards his
brethren. His death.

50:1. And when Joseph saw this, he fell upon his father's face, weeping
and kissing him.

50:2. And he commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his
father.

50:3. And while they were fulfilling his commands, there passed forty
days: for this was the manner with bodies that were embalmed, and Egypt
mourned for him seventy days.

50:4. And the time of the mourning being expired, Joseph spoke to the
family of Pharao: If I have found favour in your sight, speak in the
ears of Pharao:

50:5. For my father made me swear to him, saying: Behold I die; thou
shalt bury me in my sepulchre which I have digged for myself in the land
of Chanaan. So I will go up and bury my father, and return.

50:6. And Pharao said to him: Go up and bury thy father according as he
made thee swear.

50:7. So he went up, and there went with him all the ancients of
Pharao's house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt.

50:8. And the house of Joseph with his brethren, except their children,
and their flocks and herds, which they left in the land of Gessen.

50:9. He had also in his train chariots and horsemen: and it was a great
company.

50:10. And they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is situated
beyond the Jordan: where celebrating the exequies with a great and
vehement lamentation, they spent full seven days.

50:11. And when the inhabitants of Chanaan saw this, they said: This is
a great mourning to the Egyptians. And therefore the name of that place
was called, The mourning of Egypt.

50:12. So the sons of Jacob did as he had commanded them.

50:13. And carrying him into the land of Chanaan, they buried him in the
double cave, which Abraham had bought together with the field for a
possession of a burying place, of Ehpron, the Hethite, over against
Mambre.

50:14. And Joseph returned into Egypt with his brethren, and all that
were in his company, after he had buried his father.

50:15. Now he being dead, his brethren were afraid, and talked one with
another: Lest perhaps he should remember the wrong he suffered, and
requite us all the evil that we did to him.

50:16. And they sent a message to him, saying: Thy father commanded us
before he died,

50:17. That we should say thus much to thee from him: I beseech thee to
forget the wickedness of thy brethren, and the sin and malice they
practised against thee: we also pray thee, to forgive the servants of
the God of thy father this wickedness. And when Joseph heard this, he
wept.

50:18. And his brethren came to him; and worshipping prostrate on the
ground, they said: We are thy servants.

50:19. And he answered them: Fear not: can we resist the will of God?

50:20. You thought evil against me: but God turned it into good, that he
might exalt me, as at present you see, and might save many people.

50:21. Fear not: I will feed you and your children. And he comforted
them, and spoke gently and mildly.

50:22. And he dwelt in Egypt with all his father's house; and lived a
hundred and ten years. And he saw the children of Ephraim to the third
generation. The children also of Machir, the sons of Manasses, were born
on Joseph's knees.

50:23. After which he told his brethren: God will visit you after my
death, and will make you go up out of this land, to the land which he
swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

50:24. And he made them swear to him, saying: God will visit you, carry
my bones with you out of this place:

50:25. And he died, being a hundred and ten years old. And being
embalmed, he was laid in a coffin in Egypt.







THE BOOK OF EXODUS

The Second Book of Moses is called EXODUS, from the Greek word EXODOS,
which signifies going out: because it contains the history of the going
out of the children of Israel out of Egypt. The Hebrews, from the words
with which it begins, call it VEELLE SEMOTH: These are the names. It
contains transactions for 145 years; that is, from the death of Joseph
to the erecting of the tabernacle.


Exodus Chapter 1

The Israelites are multiplied in Egypt. They are oppressed by a new
king, who commandeth all their male children to be killed.

1:1. These are the names of the children of Israel, that went into Egypt
with Jacob: they went in every man with his household:

1:2. Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Juda,

1:3. Issachar, Zabulon, and Benjamin,

1:4. Dan, and Nephthali, Gad and Aser.

1:5. And all the souls that came out of Jacob's thigh, were seventy: but
Joseph was in Egypt.

1:6. After he was dead, and all his brethren, and all that generation,

1:7. The children of Israel increased, and sprung up into multitudes,
and growing exceedingly strong they filled the land.

1:8. In the mean time there arose a new king over Egypt, that knew not
Joseph:

1:9. And he said to his people: Behold the people of the children of
Israel are numerous and stronger than we.

1:10. Come let us wisely oppress them, lest they multiply: and if any
war shall rise against us, join with our enemies, and having overcome
us, depart out of the land.

1:11. Therefore he set over them masters of the works, to afflict them
with burdens: and they built for Pharao cities of tabernacles, Phithom,
and Ramesses.

Of tabernacles... Or, of storehouses.

1:12. But the more they oppressed them, the more they were multiplied
and increased.

1:13. And the Egyptians hated the children of Israel, and afflicted them
and mocked them:

1:14. And they made their life bitter with hard works in clay and brick,
and with all manner of service, wherewith they were overcharged in the
works of the earth.

1:15. And the king of Egypt spoke to the midwives of the Hebrews: of
whom one was called Sephora, the other Phua,

1:16. Commanding them: When you shall do the office of midwives to the
Hebrew women, and the time of delivery is come: if it be a man child,
kill it: if a woman, keep it alive.

1:17. But the midwives feared God, and did not do as the king of Egypt
had commanded, but saved the men children.

1:18: And the king called for them and said: What is it that you meant
to do, that you would save the men children?

1:19. They answered: The Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women: for
they themselves are skilful in the office of a midwife; and they are
delivered before we come to them.

1:20. Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied and grew exceedingly strong.

1:21. And because the midwives feared God, he built them houses.

Because the midwives feared God, etc... The midwives were rewarded, not
for their lie, which was a venial sin; but for their fear of God, and
their humanity: but this reward was only temporal, in building them
houses, that is, in establishing and enriching their families.

1:22. Pharao therefore charged all his people, saying: Whatsoever shall
be born of the male sex, ye shall cast into the river: whatsoever of the
female, ye shall save alive.

Exodus Chapter 2

Moses is born and exposed on the bank of the river; where he is taken up
by the daughter of Pharao, and adopted for her son. He killeth an
Egyptian, and fleeth into Madian; where he marrieth a wife.

2:1. After this there went a man of the house of Levi; and took a wife
of his own kindred.

2:2. And she conceived, and bore a son: and seeing him a goodly child,
hid him three months.

2:3. And when she could hide him no longer, she took a basket made of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and pitch: and put the little babe
therein, and laid him in the sedges by the river's brink,

2:4. His sister standing afar off, and taking notice what would be done.

2:5. And behold the daughter of Pharao came down to wash herself in the
river: and her maids walked by the river's brink. And when she saw the
basket in the sedges she sent one of her maids for it: and when it was
brought,

2:6. She opened it, and seeing within it an infant crying, having
compassion on it, she said: This is one of the babes of the Hebrews.

2:7. And the child's sister said to her: Shall I go, and call to thee a
Hebrew woman, to nurse the babe?

2:8. She answered: Go. The maid went and called her mother.

2:9. And Pharao's daughter said to her: Take this child, and nurse him
for me: I will give thee thy wages. The woman took and nursed the
child: and when he was grown up, she delivered him to Pharao's daughter.

2:10. And she adopted him for a son, and called him Moses, saying:
Because I took him out of the water.

Moses... Or Moyses, in the Egyptian tongue, signifies one taken or saved
out of the water.

2:11. In those days, after Moses was grown up, he went out to his
brethren: and saw their affliction, and an Egyptian striking one of the
Hebrews, his brethren.

2:12. And when he had looked about this way and that way, and saw no one
there, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.

He slew the Egyptian... This he did by a particular inspiration of God;
as a prelude to his delivering the people from their oppression and
bondage. He thought, says St. Stephen, Acts 7.25, that his brethren
understood that God by his hand would save them. But such particular and
extraordinary examples are not to be imitated.

2:13. And going out the next day, he saw two Hebrews quarrelling: and he
said to him that did the wrong: Why strikest thou thy neighbour?

2:14. But he answered: Who hath appointed thee prince and judge over us?
wilt thou kill me, as thou didst yesterday kill the Egyptian? Moses
feared, and said: How is this come to be known?

2:15. And Pharao heard of this word, and sought to kill Moses: but he
fled from his sight, and abode in the land of Madian, and he sat down by
a well.

Madian... A city and country of Arabia, which took its name from Madian
the son of Abraham, by Cetura, and was peopled by his posterity.

2:16. And the priest of Madian had seven daughters, who came to draw
water: and when the troughs were filled, desired to water their father's
flocks.

2:17. And the shepherds came and drove them away: and Moses arose, and
defending the maids, watered their sheep.

2:18: And when they returned to Raguel their father, he said to them:
Why are ye come sooner than usual?

Raguel... He had two names, being also called Jethro, as appears from
the first verse of the following chapter.

2:19. They answered: A man of Egypt delivered us from the hands of the
shepherds: and he drew water also with us, and gave the sheep to drink.

2:20. But he said: Where is he? why have you let the man go? call him
that he may eat bread.

2:21. And Moses swore that he would dwell with him. And he took Sephora
his daughter to wife:

2:22. And she bore him a son, whom he called Gersam, saying: I have been
a stranger in a foreign country. And she bore another, whom he called
Eliezer, saying: For the God of my father, my helper, hath delivered me
out of the hand of Pharao.

Gersam... Or Gershom. This name signifies a stranger there: as Eliezer
signifies the help of God.

2:23. Now after a long time the king of Egypt died: and the children of
Israel groaning, cried out because of the works: and their cry went up
unto God from the works.

2:24. And he heard their groaning, and remembered the covenant which he
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

2:25. And the Lord looked upon the children of Israel, and he knew them.

Knew them... That is, he had respect to them, he cast a merciful eye
upon them.

Exodus Chapter 3

God appeareth to Moses in a bush, and sendeth him to deliver Israel.


3:1. Now Moses fed the sheep of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of
Madian: and he drove the flock to the inner parts of the desert, and
came to the mountain of God, Horeb.

3:2. And the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of
a bush: and he saw that the bush was on fire, and was not burnt.

The Lord appeared... That is, an angel representing God, and speaking in
his name.

3:3. And Moses said: I will go, and see this great sight, why the bush
is not burnt.

3:4. And when the Lord saw that he went forward to see, he called to him
out of the midst of the bush, and said: Moses, Moses. And he answered:
Here I am.

3:5. And he said: Come not nigh hither, put off the shoes from thy feet;
for the place, whereon thou standest, is holy ground.

3:6. And he said: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Moses hid his face: for he durst
not look at God.

3:7. And the Lord said to him: I have seen the affliction of my people
in Egypt, and I have heard their cry because of the rigour of them that
are over the works;

3:8. And knowing their sorrow, I am come down to deliver them out of the
hands of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land into a good
and spacious land, into a land that floweth with milk and honey, to the
places of the Chanaanite, and Hethite, and Amorrhite, and Pherezite, and
Hevite, and Jebusite.

3:9. For the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have
seen their affliction, wherewith they are oppressed by the Egyptians.

3:10. But come, and I will send thee to Pharao, that thou mayst bring
forth my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.

3:11. And Moses said to God: Who am I that I should go to Pharao, and
should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?

3:12. And he said to him: I will be with thee; and this thou shalt have
for a sign that I have sent thee: When thou shalt have brought my people
out of Egypt, thou shalt offer sacrifice to God upon this mountain.

3:13. Moses said to God: Lo, I shall go to the children of Israel, and
say to them: The God of your fathers hath sent me to you. If they shall
say to me: What is his name? What shall I say to them?

3:14. God said to Moses: I AM WHO AM. He said: Thus shalt thou say to
the children of Israel: HE WHO IS, hath sent me to you.

I am who am... That is, I am being itself, eternal, self-existent,
independent, infinite; without beginning, end, or change; and the source
of all other beings.

3:15. And God said again to Moses: Thus shalt thou say to the children
of Israel: The Lord God of your fathers the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob hath sent me to you; this is my name for
ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16. Go and gather together the ancients of Israel, and thou shalt say
to them: The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared to me, saying: Visiting I
have visited you; and I have seen all that hath befallen you in Egypt.

3:17. And I have said the word to bring you forth out of the affliction
of Egypt, into the land of the Chanaanite, and Hethite, and Amorrhite,
and Pherezite, and Hevite, and Jebusite, to a land that floweth with
milk and honey.

3:18: And they shall hear thy voice; and thou shalt go in, thou and the
ancients of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him: The
Lord God of the Hebrews hath called us; we will go three days' journey
into the wilderness, to sacrifice unto the Lord our God.

3:19. But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go, but by a
mighty hand.

3:20. For I will stretch forth my hand, and will strike Egypt with all
my wonders which I will do in the midst of them: after these he will let
you go.

3:21. And I will give favour to this people, in the sight of the
Egyptians: and when you go forth, you shall not depart empty:

3:22. But every woman shall ask of her neighbour, and of her that is in
her house, vessels of silver and of gold, and raiment: and you shall put
them on your sons and daughters, and shall spoil Egypt.

Shall spoil, etc... That is, you shall strip, and take away the goods of
the Egyptians. This was not authorizing theft or injustice; but was a
just disposal made by Him, who is the great lord and master of all
things, in order to pay the children of Israel some part of what was due
to them from the Egyptians for their labours.

Exodus Chapter 4

Moses is empowered to confirm his mission with miracles: his brother
Aaron is appointed to assist him.

4:1. Moses answered, and said: They will not believe me, nor hear my
voice, but they will say: The Lord hath not appeared to thee.

4:2. Then he said to him: What is that thou holdest in thy hand? He
answered: A rod.

4:3. And the Lord said: Cast it down upon the ground. He cast it down,
and it was turned into a serpent, so that Moses fled from it.

4:4. And the Lord said: Put out thy hand, and take it by the tail. He
put forth his hand, and took hold of it, and it was turned into a rod.

4:5. That they may believe, saith he, that the Lord God of their
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath appeared to thee.

4:6. And the Lord said again: Put thy hand into thy bosom. And when he
had put it into his bosom, he brought it forth leprous as snow.

4:7. And he said: Put back thy hand into thy bosom. He put it back, and
brought it out again, and it was like the other flesh.

4:8. If they will not believe thee, saith he, nor hear the voice of the
former sign, they will believe the word of the latter sign.

4:9. But if they will not even believe these two signs, nor hear thy
voice: take of the river water, and pour it out upon the dry land, and
whatsoever thou drawest out of the river, shall be turned into blood.

4:10. Moses said: I beseech thee, Lord, I am not eloquent from yesterday
and the day before; and since thou hast spoken to thy servant, I have
more impediment and slowness of tongue.

4:11. The Lord said to him: Who made man's mouth? or who made the dumb
and the deaf, the seeing and the blind? did not I?

4:12. Go therefore, and I will be in thy mouth; and I will teach thee
what thou shalt speak.

4:13. But he said: I beseech thee, Lord, send whom thou wilt send.

4:14. The Lord being angry at Moses, said: Aaron the Levite is thy
brother, I know that he is eloquent: behold he cometh forth to meet
thee, and seeing thee, shall be glad at heart.

4:15. Speak to him, and put my words in his mouth: and I will be in thy
mouth, and in his month, and will shew you what you must do.

4:16. He shall speak in thy stead to the people, and shall be thy mouth:
but thou shalt be to him in those things that pertain to God.

4:17. And take this rod in thy hand, wherewith thou shalt do the signs.

4:18: Moses went his way, and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and
said to him; I will go and return to my brethren into Egypt, that I may
see if they be yet alive. And Jethro said to him: Go in peace.

4:19. And the Lord said to Moses, in Madian: Go, and return into Egypt;
for they are all dead that sought thy life.

4:20. Moses therefore took his wife, and his sons, and set them upon an
ass; and returned into Egypt, carrying the rod of God in his hand.

4:21. And the Lord said to him as he was returning into Egypt: See that
thou do all the wonders before Pharao, which I have put in thy hand: I
shall harden his heart, and he will not let the people go.

I shall harden, etc... Not by being the efficient cause of his sin; but
by withdrawing from him, for his just punishment, the dew of grace that
might have softened his heart; and so suffering him to grow harder and
harder.

4:22. And thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord: Israel is my son,
my firstborn.

4:23. I have said to thee: Let my son go, that he may serve me, and thou
wouldst not let him go: behold I will kill thy son, thy firstborn.

4:24. And when he was in his journey, in the inn, the Lord met him, and
would have killed him.

The Lord met him, and would have killed him... This was an angel
representing the Lord, who treated Moses in this manner, for having
neglected the circumcision of his younger son; which his wife
understanding, circumcised her child upon the spot, upon which the angel
let Moses go.

4:25. Immediately Sephora took a very sharp stone, and circumcised the
foreskin of her son, and touched his feet, and said: A bloody spouse art
thou to me.

4:26. And he let him go after she had said: A bloody spouse art thou to
me, because of the circumcision.

4:27. And the Lord said to Aaron: Go into the desert to meet Moses. And
he went forth to meet him in the mountain of God, and kissed him.

4:28. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord, by which he had
sent him, and the signs that he had commanded.

4:29. And they came together, and they assembled all the ancients of the
children of Israel.

4:30. And Aaron spoke all the words which the Lord had said to Moses:
and he wrought the signs before the people.

4:31. And the people believed. And they heard that the Lord had visited
the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction:
and falling down they adored.

Exodus Chapter 5

Pharao refuseth to let the people go. They are more oppressed.

5:1. After these things, Moses and Aaron went in, and said to Pharao:
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Let my people go, that they may
sacrifice to me in the desert.

5:2. But he answered: Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and
let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

5:3. And they said: The God of the Hebrews hath called us, to go three
days' journey into the wilderness, and to sacrifice to the Lord our God;
lest a pestilence or the sword fall upon us.

5:4. The king of Egypt said to them: Why do you Moses and Aaron draw off
the people from their works? Get you gone to your burdens.

5:5. And Pharao said: The people of the land are numerous; you see that
the multitude is increased; how much more if you give them rest from
their works?

5:6. Therefore he commanded the same day the overseers of the works, and
the task-masters of the people, saying:

5:7. You shall give straw no more to the people to make brick, as
before; but let them go and gather straw.

5:8. And you shall lay upon them the task of bricks, which they did
before; neither shall you diminish any thing thereof, for they are idle,
and therefore they cry, saying: Let us go and sacrifice to our God.

5:9. Let them be oppressed with works, and let them fulfil them; that
they may not regard lying words.

5:10. And the overseers of the works, and the taskmasters, went out and
said to the people: Thus saith Pharao: I allow you no straw;

5:11. Go, and gather it where you can find it; neither shall any thing
of your work be diminished.

5:12. And the people was scattered through all the land of Egypt to
gather straw.

5:13. And the overseers of the works pressed them, saying: Fulfil your
work every day, as before ye were wont to do, when straw was given you.

5:14. And they that were over the works of the children of Israel, were
scourged by Pharao's taskmasters, saying: Why have you not made up the
task of bricks, both yesterday and to day, as before?

5:15. And the officers of the children of Israel came, and cried out to
Pharao, saying: Why dealest thou so with thy servants?

5:16. Straw is not given us, and bricks are required of us as before;
behold we, thy servants, are beaten with whips, and thy people is
unjustly dealt withal.

5:17. And he said: You are idle, and therefore you say: Let us go and
sacrifice to the Lord.

5:18: Go therefore and work: straw shall not be given you, and you shall
deliver the accustomed number of bricks.

5:19. And the officers of the children of Israel saw that they were in
evil case, because it was said to them: There shall not a whit be
diminished of the bricks for every day.

5:20. And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood over against them as they
came out from Pharao:

5:21. And they said to them: The Lord see and judge, because you have,
made our savour to stink before Pharao and his servants, and you have
given him a sword, to kill us.

5:22. And Moses returned to the Lord, and said: Lord, why hast thou
afflicted this people? wherefore hast thou sent me?

5:23. For since the time that I went in to Pharao to speak in thy name,
he hath afflicted thy people: and thou hast not delivered them.

Exodus Chapter 6

God reneweth his promise. The genealogies of Ruben, Simon and Levi, down
to Moses and Aaron.

6:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Now thou shalt see what I will do to
Pharao: for by a mighty hand shall he let them go, and with a strong
hand shall he cast them out of his land.

6:2. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am the Lord

6:3. That appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of
God Almighty: and my name ADONAI I did not shew them.

My name Adonai... The name, which is in the Hebrew text, is that most
proper name of God, which signifieth his eternal, self-existent being,
Ex. 3.14, which the Jews out of reverence never pronounce; but, instead
of it, whenever it occurs in the Bible, they read Adonai, which
signifies the Lord; and, therefore, they put the points or vowels, which
belong to the name Adonai, to the four letters of that other ineffable
name Jod, He, Vau, He. Hence some moderns have framed the name Jehovah,
unknown to all the ancients, whether Jews or Christians; for the true
pronunciation of the name, which is in the Hebrew text, by long disuse,
is now quite lost.

6:4. And I made a covenant with them, to give them the land of Chanaan,
the land of their pilgrimage wherein they were strangers.

6:5. I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, wherewith the
Egyptians have oppressed them: and I have remembered my covenant.

6:6. Therefore say to the children of Israel: I am the Lord who will
bring you out from the work-prison of the Egyptians, and will deliver
you from bondage: and redeem you with a high arm, and great judgments.

6:7. And I will take you to myself for my people, I will be your God:
and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who brought you out from
the work-prison of the Egyptians:

6:8. And brought you into the land, concerning which I lifted up my hand
to give it to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and I will give it you to
possess: I am the Lord.

6:9. And Moses told all this to the children of Israel: but they did not
hearken to him, for anguish of spirit, and most painful work.

6:10. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:11. Go in, and speak to Pharao king of Egypt, that he let the children
of Israel go out of his land.

6:12. Moses answered before the Lord: Behold the children of Israel do
not hearken to me: and how will Pharao hear me, especially as I am of
uncircumcised lips?

Uncircumcised lips... So he calls the defect he had in his words, or
utterance.

6:13. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, and he gave them a charge
unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharao the king of Egypt, that
they should bring forth the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

6:14. These are the heads of their houses by their families. The sons of
Ruben the firstborn of Israel: Henoch and Phallu, Hesron and Charmi.

6:15. These are the kindreds of Ruben. The sons of Simeon, Jamuel and
Jamin, and Ahod, and Jachin, and Soar, and Saul the son of a
Chanaanitess: these are the families of Simeon.

6:16. And these are the names of the sons of Levi by their kindreds:
Gerson, and Caath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a
hundred and thirty-seven.


6:17. The sons of Gerson: Lobni and Semei, by their kindreds.

6:18: The sons of Caath: Amram, and Isaar, and Hebron and Oziel. And the
years of Caath's life, were a hundred and thirty-three.

6:19. The sons of Merari: Moholi and Musi. These are the kindreds of
Levi by their families.

6:20. And Amram took to wife Jochabed his aunt by the father's side: and
she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of Amram's life, were a
hundred and thirty-seven.

6:21. The sons also of Isaar: Core, and Nepheg, and Zechri.

6:22. The sons also of Oziel: Mizael, and Elizaphan, and Sethri.

6:23. And Aaron took to wife Elizabeth the daughter of Aminadab, sister
of Nahason, who bore him Nadab, and Abiu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.

6:24. The sons also of Core: Aser, and Elcana, and Abiasaph. These are
the kindreds of the Corites.

6:25. But Eleazar the son of Aaron took a wife of the daughters of
Phutiel: and she bore him Phinees. These are the heads of the Levitical
families by their kindreds.

6:26. These are Aaron and Moses, whom the Lord commanded to bring forth
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their companies.

6:27. These are they that speak to Pharao, king of Egypt, in order to
bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and
Aaron,

6:28. In the day when the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt.

6:29. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am the Lord; speak thou to
Pharao, king of Egypt, all that I say to thee.

6:30. And Moses said before the Lord: Lo I am of uncircumcised lips, how
will Pharao hear me?

Exodus Chapter 7

Moses and Aaron go into Pharao: they turn the rod into a serpent; and
the waters of Egypt into blood, which was the first plague. The
magicians do the like, and Pharao's heart is hardened.

7:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Behold, I have appointed thee the god
of Pharao; and Aaron, thy brother, shall be thy prophet.

The god of Pharao... Viz., to be his judge; and to exercise a divine
power, as God's instrument, over him and his people.

7:2. Thou shalt speak to him all that I command thee; and he shall speak
to Pharao, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

7:3. But I shall harden his heart, and shall multiply my signs and
wonders in the land of Egypt.

I shall harden, etc... not by being the efficient cause of his hardness
of heart, but by permitting it; and by withdrawing grace from him, in
punishment of his malice; which alone was the proper cause of his being
hardened.

7:4. And he will not hear you: and I will lay my hand upon Egypt, and
will bring forth my army and my people, the children of Israel, out of
the land of Egypt, by very great judgments.

7:5. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, who have stretched
forth my hand upon Egypt, and have brought forth the children of Israel
out of the midst of them.

7:6. And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded; so did they.

7:7. And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three, when they
spoke to Pharao.

7:8. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron:

7:9. When Pharao shall say to you, Shew signs; thou shalt say to Aaron:
Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharao, and it shall be turned
into a serpent.

7:10. So Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharao, and did as the Lord had
commanded. And Aaron took the rod before Pharao and his servants, and it
was turned into a serpent.

7:11. And Pharao called the wise men and the magicians; and they also by
Egyptian enchantments and certain secrets, did in like manner.

Magicians... Jannes, and Mambres, or Jambres, 2 Tim. 3.8.

7:12. And they every one cast down their rods, and they were turned into
serpents: but Aaron's rod devoured their rods.

7:13. And Pharao's heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them,
as the Lord had commanded.

7:14. And the Lord said to Moses: Pharao's heart is hardened, he will
not let the people go.

7:15. Go to him in the morning, behold he will go out to the waters: and
thou shalt stand to meet him on the bank of the river: and thou shalt
take in thy hand the rod that was turned into a serpent.

7:16. And thou shalt say to him: The Lord God of the Hebrews sent me to
thee, saying: Let my people go to sacrifice to me in the desert: and
hitherto thou wouldst not hear.

7:17. Thus therefore saith the Lord: In this thou shalt know that I am
the Lord: behold I will strike with the rod, that is in my hand, the
water of the river, and it shall be turned into blood.

7:18: And the fishes that are in the river, shall die, and the waters
shall be corrupted, and the Egyptians shall be afflicted when they drink
the water of the river.

7:19. The Lord also said to Moses: Say to Aaron, Take thy rod; and
stretch forth thy hand upon the waters of Egypt, and upon their rivers,
and streams and pools, and all the ponds of waters, that they may be
turned into blood: and let blood be in all the land of Egypt, both in
vessels of wood and of stone.

7:20. And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded: and lifting up
the rod, he struck the water of the river before Pharao and his
servants: and it was turned into blood.

7:21. And the fishes that were in the river died; and the river
corrupted, and the Egyptians could not drink the water of the river, and
there was blood in all the land of Egypt.

7:22. And the magicians of the Egyptians with their enchantments did in
like manner; and Pharao's heart was hardened, neither did he hear them,
as the Lord had commanded. 7:23. And he turned himself away, and went
into his house, neither did he set his heart to it this time also.

7:24. And all the Egyptians dug round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25. And seven days were fully ended, after that the Lord struck the
river.

Exodus Chapter 8

The second plague is of frogs: Pharao promiseth to let the Israelites
go, but breaketh his promise. The third plague is of sciniphs. The
fourth is of flies. Pharao again promiseth to dismiss the people, but
doth it not.

8:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao, and thou shalt say to
him: Thus saith the Lord: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.

8:2. But if thou wilt not let them go, behold I will strike all thy
coasts with frogs.

8:3. And the river shall bring forth an abundance of frogs; which shall
come up and enter into thy house, and thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed,
and into the houses of thy servants, and to thy people, and into thy
ovens, and into the remains of thy meats:

8:4. And the frogs shall come in to thee, and to thy people, and to all
thy servants.

8:5. And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron: Stretch forth thy hand
upon the streams, and upon the rivers and the pools, and bring forth
frogs upon the land of Egypt.

8:6. And Aaron stretched forth his hand upon the waters of Egypt, and
the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

8:7. And the magicians also, by their enchantments, did in like manner,
and they brought forth frogs upon the land of Egypt.

8:8. But Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Pray ye to the
Lord to take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I will let
the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.

Pray ye to the Lord, etc... By this it appears, that though the
magicians, by the help of the devil, could bring frogs, yet they could
not take them away: God being pleased to abridge in this the power of
Satan. So we see they could not afterwards produce the lesser insects;
and in this restraint of the power of the devil, were forced to
acknowledge the finger of God.

8:9. And Moses said to Pharao: Set me a time when I shall pray for thee,
and for thy servants, and for thy people, that the frogs may be driven
away from thee and from thy house, and from thy servants, and from thy
people; and may remain only in the river.

8:10. And he answered: To morrow. But he said: I will do according to
thy word; that thou mayest know that there is none like to the Lord our
God.

8:11. And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy house, and from
thy servants, and from thy people; and shall remain only in the river.

8:12. And Moses and Aaron went forth from Pharao: and Moses cried to the
Lord for the promise, which he had made to Pharao concerning the frogs.

8:13. And the Lord did according to the word of Moses: and the frogs
died out of the houses, and out of the villages, and out of the fields:

8:14. And they gathered them together into immense heaps, and the land
was corrupted.

8:15. And Pharao seeing that rest was given, hardened his own heart, and
did not hear them, as the Lord had commanded.

Pharao hardened his own heart... By this we see that Pharao was himself
the efficient cause of his heart being hardened, and not God.-See the
same repeated in ver. 32. Pharao hardened his heart at this time also:
likewise chap. 9.7, 35, and chap. 13.15.

8:16. And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron: Stretch forth thy rod,
and strike the dust of the earth; and may there be sciniphs in all the
land of Egypt.

Sciniphs... Or Cinifs, Hebrew Chinnim, small flying insects, very
troublesome both to men and beast.

8:17. And they did so. And Aaron stretched forth his hand, holding the
rod; and he struck the dust of the earth, and there came sciniphs on men
and on beasts: all the dust of the earth was turned into sciniphs
through all the land of Egypt.

8:18: And the magicians with their enchantments practised in like
manner, to bring forth sciniphs, and they could not: and there were
sciniphs as well on men as on beasts.

8:19. And the magicians said to Pharao: This is the finger of God. And
Pharao's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord
had commanded.

8:20. The Lord also said to Moses: Arise early, and stand before Pharao;
for he will go forth to the waters: and thou shalt say to him: Thus
saith the Lord: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.

8:21. But if thou wilt not let them go, behold I will send in upon thee,
and upon thy servants, and upon thy houses, all kind of flies: and the
houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with flies of divers kinds, and
the whole land wherein they shall be.

8:22. And I will make the land of Gessen wonderful in that day, so that
flies shall not be there: and thou shalt know that I am the Lord in the
midst of the earth.

8:23. And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24. And the Lord did so. And there came a very grievous swarm of flies
into the houses of Pharao and of his servants, and into all the land of
Egypt: and the land was corrupted by this kind of flies.

8:25. And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Go and
sacrifice to your God in this land.

8:26. And Moses said: It cannot be so: for we shall sacrifice the
abominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God: now if we kill those
things which the Egyptians worship, in their presence, they will stone
us.

The abominations, etc... That is, the things they worship for Gods:
oxen, rams, etc. It is the usual style of the scriptures to call all
idols and false gods, abominations, to signify how much the people of
God ought to detest and abhor them.

8:27. We will go three days' journey into the wilderness; and we will
sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.

8:28. And Pharao said: I will let you go to sacrifice to the Lord your
God in the wilderness, but go no farther: pray for me.

8:29. And Moses said: I will go out from thee, and will pray to the
Lord: and the flies shall depart from Pharao, and from his servants, and
from his people to morrow: but do not deceive any more, in not letting
the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.

8:30. So Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed to the Lord.

8:31. And he did according to his word: and he took away the flies from
Pharao, and from his servants, and from his people: there was not left
so much as one.

8:32. And Pharao's heart was hardened, so that neither this time would
he let the people go.

Exodus Chapter 9

The fifth plague is a murrain among the cattle. The sixth, of boils in
men and beasts. The seventh, of hail. Pharao promiseth again to let the
people go, and breaketh his word.

9:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao, and speak to him: Thus
saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.

9:2. But if thou refuse, and withhold them still:

9:3. Behold my hand shall be upon thy fields; and a very grievous
murrain upon thy horses, and asses, and camels, and oxen, and sheep.

9:4. And the Lord will make a wonderful difference between the
possessions of Israel and the possessions of the Egyptians, that nothing
at all shall die of those things that belong to the children of Israel.

9:5. And the Lord appointed a time, saying: To morrow will the Lord do
this thing in the land.

9:6. The Lord therefore did this thing the next day: and all the beasts
of the Egyptians died, but of the beasts of the children of Israel there
died not one.

All the beasts... That is, many of all kinds.

9:7. And Pharao sent to see; and there was not any thing dead of that
which Israel possessed. And Pharao's heart was hardened, and he did not
let the people go.

9:8. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: Take to you handfuls of ashes
out of the chimney, and let Moses sprinkle it in the air in the presence
of Pharao.

9:9. And be there dust upon all the land of Egypt: for there shall be
boils and swelling blains both in men and beasts, in the whole land of
Egypt.

9:10. And they took ashes out of the chimney, and stood before Pharao,
and Moses sprinkled it in the air; and there came boils with swelling
blains in men and beasts.

9:11. Neither could the magicians stand before Moses, for the boils that
were upon them, and in all the land of Egypt.


9:12. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he hearkened not unto
them, as the Lord had spoken to Moses.

Hardened, etc... See the annotations above, chap. 4.21, chap. 7.3, and
chap. 8.15.

9:13. And the Lord said to Moses: Arise in the morning, and stand before
Pharao, and thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord, the God of the
Hebrews: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.

9:14. For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thy heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayst know that there
is none like me in all the earth.

9:15. For now I will stretch out my hand to strike thee, and thy people,
with pestilence, and thou shalt perish from the earth.

9:16. And therefore have I raised thee, that I may shew my power in
thee, and my name may be spoken of throughout all the earth.

9:17. Dost thou yet hold back my people; and wilt thou not let them go?

9:18: Behold I will cause it to rain to morrow at this same hour, an
exceeding great hail; such as hath not been in Egypt from the day that
it was founded, until this present time.

9:19. Send therefore now presently, and gather together thy cattle, and
all that thou hast in the field; for men and beasts, and all things that
shall be found abroad, and not gathered together out of the fields which
the hail shall fall upon, shall die.

9:20. He that feared the word of the Lord among Pharao's servants, made
his servants and his cattle flee into houses:

9:21. But he that regarded not the word of the Lord, left his servants,
and his cattle in the fields.

9:22. And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand towards heaven,
that there may be hail in the whole land of Egypt upon men, and upon
beasts, and upon every herb of the field in the land of Egypt.

9:23. And Moses stretched forth his rod towards heaven, and the Lord
sent thunder and hail, and lightnings running along the ground: and the
Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

9:24. And the hail and fire mixt with it drove on together: and it was
of so great bigness, as never before was seen in the whole land of Egypt
since that nation was founded.

9:25. And the hail destroyed through all the land of Egypt all things
that were in the fields, both man and beast: and the hail smote every
herb of the field, and it broke every tree of the country.

9:26. Only in the land of Gessen, where the children of Israel were, the
hail fell not.

9:27. And Pharao sent and called Moses and Aaron, saying to them: I have
sinned this time also, the Lord is just: I and my people, are wicked.

9:28. Pray ye to the Lord that the thunderings of God and the hail may
cease: that I may let you go, and that ye may stay here no longer.

9:29. Moses said: As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will stretch
forth my hands to the Lord, and the thunders shall cease, and the hail
shall be no more: that thou mayst know that the earth is the Lord's:

9:30. But I know that neither thou, nor thy servants do yet fear the
Lord God.

9:31. The flax therefore, and the barley were hurt, because the barley
was green, and the flax was now bolled;

9:32. But the wheat, and other winter corn were not hurt, because they
were lateward.

9:33. And when Moses was gone from Pharao out of the city, he stretched
forth his hands to the Lord: and the thunders and the hail ceased,
neither did there drop any more rain upon the earth.

9:34. And Pharao seeing that the rain, and the hail, and the thunders
were ceased, increased his sin:

9:35. And his heart was hardened, and the heart of his servants, and it
was made exceeding hard: neither did he let the children of Israel go,
as the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moses.

Exodus Chapter 10

The eighth plague of the locusts. The ninth, of darkness: Pharao is
still hardened.

10:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao; for I have hardened
his heart, and the heart of his servants: that I may work these my signs
in him,

10:2. And thou mayst tell in the ears of thy sons, and of thy grandsons,
how often I have plagued the Egyptians, and wrought my signs amongst
them: and you may know that I am the Lord.

10:3. Therefore Moses and Aaron went in to Pharao, and said to him: Thus
saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: How long refusest thou to submit to
me? let my people go, to sacrifice to me.

10:4. But if thou resist, and wilt not let them go, behold I will bring
in to-morrow the locusts into thy coasts;

10:5. To cover the face of the earth, that nothing thereof may appear,
but that which the hail hath left may be eaten: for they shall feed upon
all the trees that spring in the fields.

10:6. And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of thy servants,
and of all the Egyptians: such a number as thy fathers have not seen,
nor thy grandfathers, from the time they were first upon the earth,
until this present day. And he turned himself away, and went forth from
Pharao.

10:7. And Pharao's servants said to him: How long shall we endure this
scandal? Iet the men go to sacrifice to the Lord their God. Dost thou
not see that Egypt is undone?

10:8. And they called back Moses, and Aaron, to Pharao; and he said to
them: Go, sacrifice to the Lord your God: who are they that shall go?

10:9. Moses said: We will go with our young and old, with our sons and
daughters, with our sheep and herds: for it is the solemnity of the Lord
our God.

10:10. And Pharao answered: So be the Lord with you, as I shall let you
and your children go: who can doubt but that you intend some great evil?

10:11. It shall not be so, but go ye men only, and sacrifice to the
Lord: for this yourselves also desired. And immediately they were cast
out from Pharao's presence.

10:12. And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand upon the land
of Egypt unto the locust, that it come upon it, and devour every herb
that is left after the hail.

10:13. And Moses stretched forth his rod upon the land of Egypt: and the
Lord brought a burning wind all that day, and night; and when it was
morning, the burning wind raised the locusts.

10:14. And they came up over the whole land of Egypt; and rested in all
the coasts of the Egyptians, innumerable, the like as had not been
before that time, nor shall be hereafter.

10:15. And they covered the whole face of the earth, wasting all things.
And the grass of the earth was devoured, and what fruits soever were on
the trees, which the hail had left; and there remained not any thing
that was green on the trees, or in the herbs of the earth, in all Egypt.

10:16. Wherefore Pharao in haste called Moses and Aaron, and said to
them: I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.

10:17. But now forgive me my sin this time also, and pray to the Lord
your God, that he take away from me this death.

10:18: And Moses going forth from the presence of Pharao, prayed to the
Lord:

10:19. And he made a very strong wind to blow from the west, and it took
the locusts and cast them into the Red Sea: there remained not so much
as one in all the coasts of Egypt.

10:20. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, neither did he let the
children of Israel go.

10:21. And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch out thy hand towards heaven:
and may there be darkness upon the land of Egypt so thick that it may be
felt.

Darkness upon the land of Egypt, so thick that it may be felt... By
means of the gross exhalations, which were to cause and accompany the
darkness.

10:22. And Moses stretched forth his hand towards heaven: and there came
horrible darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days.

10:23. No man saw his brother, nor moved himself out of the place where
he was: but wheresoever the children of Israel dwelt, there was light.

10:24. And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Go,
sacrifice to the Lord: let your sheep only, and herds remain, let your
children go with you.

10:25. Moses said: Thou shalt give us also sacrifices and burnt-
offerings, to the Lord our God.

10:26. All the flocks shall go with us; there shall not a hoof remain of
them: for they are necessary for the service of the Lord our God:
especially as we know not what must be offered, till we come to the very
place.

10:27. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28. And Pharao said to Moses: Get thee from me, and beware thou see
not my face any more: in what day soever thou shalt come in my sight,
thou shalt die.

10:29. Moses answered: So shall it be as thou hast spoken, I will not
see thy face anymore.

Exodus Chapter 11

Pharao and his people are threatened with the death of their firstborn.

11:1. And the Lord said to Moses: Yet one plague more will I bring upon
Pharao and Egypt, and after that he shall let you go, and thrust you
out.

11:2. Therefore thou shalt tell all the people, that every man ask of
his friend, and every woman of her neighbour, vessels of silver and of
gold.

11:3. And the Lord will give favour to his people in the sight of the
Egyptians. And Moses was a very great man in the land of Egypt, in the
sight of Pharao's servants, and of all the people.

11:4. And he said: Thus saith the Lord: At midnight I will enter into
Egypt:

11:5. And every firstborn in the land of the Egyptians shall die, from
the firstborn of Pharao who sitteth on his throne, even to the firstborn
of the handmaid that is at the mill, and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6. And there shall be a great cry in all the land of Egypt, such as
neither hath been before, nor shall be hereafter.

11:7. But with all the children of Israel there shall not a dog make the
least noise, from man even to beast; that you may know how wonderful a
difference the Lord maketh between the Egyptians and Israel.

11:8. And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and shall
worship me, saying: Go forth thou, and all the people that is under
thee: after that we will go out.

11:9. And he went out from Pharao exceeding angry. But the Lord said to
Moses: Pharao will not hear you, that many signs may be done in the land
of Egypt.

11:10. And Moses and Aaron did all the wonders that are written, before
Pharao. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, neither did he let the
children of Israel go out of his land.

The Lord hardened, etc... See the annotations above, chap. 4.21, and
chap. 7.3.

Exodus Chapter 12

The manner of preparing, and eating the paschal lamb: the firstborn of
Egypt are all slain: the Israelites depart.

12:1. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt:

12:2. This month shall be to you the beginning of months; it shall be
the first in the months of the year.

12:3. Speak ye to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, and say
to them: On the tenth day of this month let every man take a lamb by
their families and houses.

12:4. But if the number be less than may suffice to eat the lamb, he
shall take unto him his neighbour that joineth to his house, according
to the number of souls which may be enough to eat the lamb.

12:5. And it shall be a lamb without blemish, a male, of one year;
according to which rite also you shall take a kid.

A kid... The phase might be performed, either with a lamb or with a kid:
and all the same rites and ceremonies were to be used with the one as
with the other.

12:6. And you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month; and
the whole multitude of the children of Israel shall sacrifice it in the
evening.

12:7. And they shall take of the blood thereof, and put it upon both the
side posts, and on the upper door posts of the houses, wherein they
shall eat it.

12:8. And they shall eat the flesh that night roasted at the fire, and
unleavened bread with wild lettuce.

12:9. You shall not eat thereof any thing raw, nor boiled in water, but
only roasted at the fire; you shall eat the head with the feet and
entrails thereof.

12:10. Neither shall there remain any thing of it until morning. If
there be any thing left, you shall burn it with fire.

12:11. And thus you shall eat it: you shall gird your reins, and you
shall have shoes on your feet, holding staves in your hands, and you
shall eat in haste; for it is the Phase (that is the Passage) of the
Lord.

12:12. And I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and will
kill every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast: and
against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments; I am the Lord.

12:13. And the blood shall be unto you for a sign in the houses where
you shall be; and I shall see the blood, and shall pass over you; and
the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I shall strike the
land of Egypt.

12:14. And this day shall be for a memorial to you; and you shall keep
it a feast to the Lord in your generations, with an everlasting
observance.

12:15. Seven days shall you eat unleavened bread: in the first day there
shall be no leaven in your houses; whosoever shall eat any thing
leavened, from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall
perish out of Israel.

12:16. The first day shall be holy and solemn, and the seventh day shall
be kept with the like solemnity: you shall do no work in them, except
those things that belong to eating.

12:17. And you shall observe the feast of the unleavened bread: for in
this same day I will bring forth your army out of the land of Egypt, and
you shall keep this day in your generations by a perpetual observance.

12:18: The first month, the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening,
you shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
same month, in the evening.

Unleavened bread... By this it appears, that our Saviour made use of
unleavened bread, in the institution of the blessed sacrament, which was
on the evening of the paschal solemnity, at which time there was no
leavened bread to be found in Israel.

12:19. Seven days there shall not be found any leaven in your houses: he
that shall eat leavened bread, his soul shall perish out of the assembly
of Israel, whether he be a stranger or born in the land.

12:20. You shall not eat any thing leavened: in all your habitations you
shall eat unleavened bread.

12:21. And Moses called all the ancients of the children of Israel, and
said to them: Go take a lamb by your families, and sacrifice the Phase.

12:22. And dip a bunch of hyssop in the blood that is at the door, and
sprinkle the transom of the door therewith, and both the door cheeks:
let none of you go out of the door of his house till morning.

Sprinkle, etc... This sprinkling the doors of the Israelites with the
blood of the paschal lamb, in order to their being delivered from the
sword of the destroying angel, was a lively figure of our redemption by
the blood of Christ.

12:23. For the Lord will pass through striking the Egyptians: and when
he shall see the blood on the transom, and on both the posts, he will
pass over the door of the house, and not suffer the destroyer to come
into your houses and to hurt you.

12:24. Thou shalt keep this thing as a law for thee and thy children for
ever.

12:25. And when you have entered into the land which the Lord will give
you, as he hath promised, you shall observe these ceremonies.

12:26. And when your children shall say to you: What is the meaning of
this service?

12:27. You shall say to them: It is the victim of the passage of the
Lord, when he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt,
striking the Egyptians, and saving our houses. And the people bowing
themselves, adored.

12:28. And the children of Israel going forth, did as the Lord had
commanded Moses and Aaron.

12:29. And it came to pass at midnight, the Lord slew every firstborn in
the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharao, who sat on his throne,
unto the firstborn of the captive woman that was in the prison, and all
the firstborn of cattle.

12:30. And Pharao arose in the night, and all his servants, and all
Egypt: and there arose a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house
wherein there lay not one dead.

12:31. And Pharao calling Moses and Aaron, in the night, said: Arise and
go forth from among my people, you and the children of Israel: go,
sacrifice to the Lord as you say.

12:32. Your sheep and herds take along with you, as you demanded, and
departing bless me.

12:33. And the Egyptians pressed the people to go forth out of the land
speedily, saying: We shall all die.

12:34. The people therefore took dough before it was leavened; and tying
it in their cloaks, put it on their shoulders.

12:35. And the children of Israel did as Moses had commanded: and they
asked of the Egyptians vessels of silver and gold, and very much
raiment.

12:36. And the Lord gave favour to the people in the sight of the
Egyptians, so that they lent unto them: and they stripped the Egyptians.

12:37. And the children of Israel set forward from Ramesse to Socoth,
being about six hundred thousand men on foot, beside children.

12:38. And a mixed multitude, without number, went up also with them,
sheep and herds, and beasts of divers kinds, exceeding many.

12:39. And they baked the meal, which a little before they had brought
out of Egypt in dough: and they made hearth cakes unleavened: for it
could not be leavened, the Egyptians pressing them to depart, and not
suffering them to make any stay; neither did they think of preparing any
meat.

12:40. And the abode of the children of Israel that they made in Egypt,
was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41. Which being expired, the same day all the army of the Lord went
forth out of the land of Egypt.

12:42. This is the observable night of the Lord, when he brought them
forth out of the land of Egypt: this night all the children of Israel
must observe in their generations.

12:43. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: This is the service of the
Phase; no foreigner shall eat of it.

12:44. But every bought servant shall be circumcised, and so shall eat.

12:45. The stranger and the hireling shall not eat thereof.

12:46. In one house shall it be eaten, neither shall you carry forth of
the flesh thereof out of the house, neither shall you break a bone
thereof.

12:47. All the assembly of the children of Israel shall keep it.

12:48. And if any stranger be willing to dwell among you, and to keep
the Phase of the Lord, all his males shall first be circumcised, and
then shall he celebrate it according to the manner: and he shall be as
he that is born in the land: but if any man be uncircumcised, he shall
not eat thereof.

12:49. The same law shall be to him that is born in the land, and to the
proselyte that sojourneth with you.

12:50. And all the children of Israel did as the Lord had commanded
Moses and Aaron.

12:51. And the same day the Lord brought forth the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt by their companies.

Exodus Chapter 13

The paschal solemnity is to be observed; and the firstborn are to be
consecrated to God. The people are conducted through the desert by a
pillar of fire in the night, and a cloud in the day.

13:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

13:2. Sanctify unto me every firstborn that openeth the womb among the
children of Israel, as well of men as of beasts: for they are all mine.

Sanctify unto me every firstborn... Sanctification in this place means
that the firstborn males of the Hebrews should be deputed to the
ministry in the divine worship; and the firstborn of beasts to be given
for a sacrifice.

13:3. And Moses said to the people: Remember this day in which you came
forth out of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, for with a strong
hand hath the Lord brought you forth out of this place: that you eat no
leavened bread.

13:4. This day you go forth in the month of new corn.

13:5. And when the Lord shall have brought thee into the land of the
Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and the Hevite, and the
Jebusite, which he swore to thy fathers that he would give thee, a land
that floweth with milk and honey, thou shalt celebrate this manner of
sacred rites in this month.

13:6. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be the solemnity of the Lord.

13:7. Unleavened bread shall you eat seven days: there shall not be seen
any thing leavened with thee, nor in all thy coasts.

13:8. And thou shalt tell thy son in that day, saying: This is what the
Lord did to me when I came forth out of Egypt.

13:9. And it shall be as a sign in thy hand, and as a memorial before
thy eyes; and that the law of the Lord be always in thy mouth, for with
a strong hand the Lord hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

13:10. Thou shalt keep this observance at the set time from days to
days.

13:11. And when the Lord shall have brought thee into the land of the
Chanaanite, as he swore to thee and thy fathers, and shall give it thee:

13:12. Thou shalt set apart all that openeth the womb for the Lord, and
all that is first brought forth of thy cattle: whatsoever thou shalt
have of the male sex, thou shalt consecrate to the Lord.

13:13. The firstborn of an ass thou shalt change for a sheep: and if
thou do not redeem it, thou shalt kill it. And every firstborn of men
thou shalt redeem with a price.

13:14. And when thy son shall ask thee to morrow, saying: What is this?
thou shalt answer him: With a strong hand did the Lord bring us forth
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

13:15. For when Pharao was hardened, and would not let us go, the Lord
slew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man to
the firstborn of beasts: therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that
openeth the womb of the male sex, and all the firstborn of my sons I
redeem.

13:16. And it shall be as a sign in thy hand, and as a thing hung
between thy eyes, for a remembrance: because the Lord hath brought us
forth out of Egypt by a strong hand.

13:17. And when Pharao had sent out the people, the Lord led them not by
the way of the land of the Philistines, which is near; thinking lest
perhaps they would repent, if they should see wars arise against them,
and would return into Egypt.

13:18: But he led them about by the way of the desert, which is by the
Red Sea: and the children of Israel went up armed out of the land of
Egypt.

13:19. And Moses took Joseph's bones with him: because he had adjured
the children of Israel, saying: God shall visit you, carry out my bones
from hence with you.

13:20. And marching from Socoth, they encamped in Etham, in the utmost
coasts of the wilderness.

13:21. And the Lord went before them to shew the way, by day in a pillar
of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire; that he might be the guide
of their journey at both times.

13:22. There never failed the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar
of fire by night, before the people.

Exodus Chapter 14

Pharao pursueth the children of Israel. They murmur against Moses, but
are encouraged by him, and pass through the Red Sea. Pharao and his army
following them are drowned.

14:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

14:2. Speak to the children of Israel: Let them turn and encamp over
against Phihahiroth, which is between Magdal and the sea over against
Beelsephon: you shall encamp before it upon the sea.

14:3. And Pharao will say of the children of Israel: They are straitened
in the land, the desert hath shut them in.

14:4. And I shall harden his heart and he will pursue you: and I shall
be glorified in Pharao, and in all his army: and the Egyptians shall
know that I am the Lord. And they did so.

14:5. And it was told the king of the Egyptians that the people was
fled: and the heart of Pharao and of his servants was changed with
regard to the people, and they said: What meant we to do, that we let
Israel go from serving us?

14:6. So he made ready his chariot, and took all his people with him.

14:7. And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots that
were in Egypt: and the captains of the whole army.

14:8. And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, king of Egypt, and he
pursued the children of Israel; but they were gone forth in a mighty
hand.

14:9. And when the Egyptians followed the steps of them who were gone
before, they found them encamped at the sea side: all Pharao's horse and
chariots and the whole army were in Phihahiroth, before Beelsephon.

14:10. And when Pharao drew near, the children of Israel lifting up
their eyes, saw the Egyptians behind them: and they feared exceedingly,
and cried to the Lord.

14:11. And they said to Moses: Perhaps there were no graves in Egypt,
therefore thou hast brought us to die in the wilderness: why wouldst
thou do this, to lead us out of Egypt?

14:12. Is not this the word that we spoke to thee in Egypt, saying:
Depart from us, that we may serve the Egyptians? for it was much better
to serve them, than to die in the wilderness.

14:13. And Moses said to the people: Fear not: stand, and see the great
wonders of the Lord, which he will do this day; for the Egyptians, whom
you see now, you shall see no more for ever.

14:14. The Lord will fight for you, and you shall hold your peace.

14:15. And the Lord said to Moses: Why criest thou to me? Speak to the
children of Israel to go forward.

14:16. But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch forth thy hand over the
sea, and divide it: that the children of Israel may go through the midst
of the sea on dry ground.

14:17. And I will harden the heart of the Egyptians to pursue you: and I
will be glorified in Pharao, and in all his host, and in his chariots
and in his horsemen.

14:18: And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall be
glorified in Pharao, and in his chariots, and in his horsemen.

14:19. And the angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel,
removing, went behind them: and together with him the pillar of the
cloud, leaving the forepart,

14:20. Stood behind, between the Egyptians' camp and the camp of Israel:
and it was a dark cloud, and enlightening the night, so that they could
not come at one another all the night.

A dark cloud, and enlightening the night... It was a dark cloud to the
Egyptians; but enlightened the night to the Israelites by giving them a
great light.

14:21. And when Moses had stretched forth his hand over the sea, the
Lord took it away by a strong and burning wind blowing all the night,
and turned it into dry ground: and the water was divided.

14:22. And the children of Israel went in through the midst of the sea
dried up; for the water was as a wall on their right hand and on their
left.

14:23. And the Egyptians pursuing went in after them, and all Pharao's
horses, his chariots and horsemen, through the midst of the sea.

14:24. And now the morning watch was come, and behold the Lord looking
upon the Egyptian army through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, slew
their host.

14:25. And overthrew the wheels of the chariots, and they were carried
into the deep. And the Egyptians said: Let us flee from Israel; for the
Lord fighteth for them against us.

14:26. And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand over the sea,
that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots
and horsemen.

14:27. And when Moses had stretched forth his hand towards the sea, it
returned at the first break of day to the former place: and as the
Egyptians were fleeing away, the waters came upon them, and the Lord
shut them up in the middle of the waves.

14:28. And the waters returned, and covered the chariots and the
horsemen of all the army of Pharao, who had come into the sea after
them, neither did there so much as one of them remain.

14:29. But the children of Israel marched through the midst of the sea
upon dry land, and the waters were to them as a wall on the right hand
and on the left:

14:30. And the Lord delivered Israel in that day out of the hands of the
Egyptians.

14:31. And they saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore, and the
mighty hand that the Lord had used against them: and the people feared
the Lord, and they believed the Lord, and Moses his servant.

Exodus Chapter 15

The canticle of Moses. The bitter waters of Mara are made sweet.

15:1. Then Moses and the children of Israel sung this canticle to the
Lord, and said: Let us sing to the Lord: for he is gloriously magnified,
the horse and the rider he hath thrown into the sea.

15:2. The Lord is my strength and my praise, and he is become salvation
to me: he is my God, and I will glorify him: the God of my father, and I
will exalt him.

15:3. The Lord is as a man of war, Almighty is his name.

15:4. Pharao's chariots and his army he hath cast into the sea: his
chosen captains are drowned in the Red Sea.

15:5. The depths have covered them, they are sunk to the bottom like a
stone.

15:6. Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength: thy right hand,
O Lord, hath slain the enemy.

15:7. And in the multitude of thy glory thou hast put down thy
adversaries: thou hast sent thy wrath, which hath devoured them like
stubble.

15:8. And with the blast of thy anger the waters were gathered together:
the flowing water stood, the depths were gathered together in the midst
of the sea.

15:9. The enemy said: I will pursue and overtake, I will divide the
spoils, my soul shall have its fill: I will draw my sword, my hand shall
slay them.

15:10. Thy wind blew and the sea covered them: they sunk as lead in the
mighty waters.

15:11. Who is like to thee, among the strong, O Lord? who is like to
thee, glorious in holiness, terrible and praise-worthy, doing wonders?

15:12. Thou stretchedst forth thy hand, and the earth swallowed them.

15:13. In thy mercy thou hast been a leader to the people which thou
hast redeemed: and in thy strength thou hast carried them to thy holy
habitation.

15:14. Nations rose up, and were angry: sorrows took hold on the
inhabitants of Philisthiim.

15:15. Then were the princes of Edom troubled, trembling seized on the
stout men of Moab: all the inhabitants of Chanaan became stiff.

15:16. Let fear and dread fall upon them, in the greatness of thy arm:
let them become immoveable as a stone, until thy people, O Lord, pass
by: until this thy people pass by, which thou hast possessed.

15:17. Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thy
inheritance, in thy most firm habitation, which thou hast made, O Lord;
thy sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.

15:18: The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19. For Pharao went in on horseback with his chariots and horsemen
into the sea: and the Lord brought back upon them the waters of the sea:
but the children of Israel walked on dry ground in the midst thereof.

15:20. So Mary the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in
her hand: and all the women went forth after her with timbrels and with
dances.

15:21. And she began the song to them, saying: Let us sing to the Lord,
for he is gloriously magnified, the horse and his rider he hath thrown
into the sea.

15:22. And Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went forth
into the wilderness of Sur: and they marched three days through the
wilderness, and found no water.

15:23. And they came into Mara, and they could not drink the waters of
Mara because they were bitter: whereupon he gave a name also agreeable
to the place, calling it Mara, that is, bitterness.

15:24. And the people murmured against Moses, saying: What shall we
drink?

15:25. But he cried to the Lord, and he shewed him a tree, which when he
had cast into the waters, they were turned into sweetness. There he
appointed him ordinances, and judgments, and there he proved him,

15:26. Saying: If thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and do
what is right before him, and obey his commandments, and keep all his
precepts, none of the evils that I laid upon Egypt, will I bring upon
thee: for I am the Lord thy healer.

15:27. And the children of Israel came into Elim, where there were
twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm trees: and they encamped by
the waters.

Exodus Chapter 16

The people murmur for want of meat: God giveth them quails and manna.

16:1. And they set forward from Elim, and all the multitude of the
children of Israel came into the desert of Sin, which is between Elim
and Sinai: the fifteenth day of the second month, after they came out of
the land of Egypt.

16:2. And all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.

16:3. And the children of Israel said to them: Would to God we had died
by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat over the
fleshpots, and ate bread to the full: Why have you brought us into this
desert, that you might destroy all the multitude with famine?

16:4. And the Lord said to Moses: Behold I will rain bread from heaven
for you; let the people go forth, and gather what is sufficient for
every day: that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law, or
not.

16:5. But the sixth day let them provide for to bring in: and let it be
double to that they were wont to gather every day.

16:6. And Moses and Aaron said to the children of Israel In the evening
you shall know that the Lord hath brought you forth out of the land of
Egypt:

16:7. And in the morning you shall see the glory of the Lord: for he
hath heard your murmuring against the Lord: but as for us, what are we,
that you mutter against us?

16:8. And Moses said: In the evening the Lord will give you flesh to
eat, and in the morning bread to the full: for he hath heard your
murmurings, with which you have murmured against him, for what are we?
your murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord.

16:9. Moses also said to Aaron: Say to the whole congregation of the
children of Israel: Come before the Lord; for he hath heard your
murmuring.

16:10. And when Aaron spoke to all the assembly of the children of
Israel, they looked towards the wilderness; and behold the glory of the
Lord appeared in a cloud.

16:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

16:12. I have heard the murmuring of the children of Israel, say to
them: In the evening you shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall
have your fill of bread; and you shall know that I am the Lord your God.

16:13. So it came to pass in the evening, that quails coming up, covered
the camp: and in the morning a dew lay round about the camp.

16:14. And when it had covered the face of the earth, it appeared in the
wilderness small, and as it were beaten with a pestle, like unto the
hoar frost on the ground.

16:15. And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another:
Manhu! which signifieth: What is this! for they knew not what it was.
And Moses said to them: This is the bread which the Lord hath given you
to eat.

16:16. This is the word that the Lord hath commanded: Let every one
gather of it as much as is enough to eat; a gomor for every man,
according to the number of your souls that dwell in a tent, so shall you
take of it.

16:17. And the children of Israel did so: and they gathered, one more,
another less.

16:18: And they measured by the measure of a gomor: neither had he more
that had gathered more; nor did he find less that had provided less: but
every one had gathered, according to what they were able to eat.

16:19. And Moses said to them: Let no man leave thereof till the
morning.

16:20. And they hearkened not to him, but some of them left until the
morning, and it began to be full of worms, and it putrified, and Moses
was angry with them.

16:21. Now every one of them gathered in the morning, as much as might
suffice to eat: and after the sun grew hot, it melted.

16:22. But on the sixth day they gathered twice as much, that is, two
gomors every man: and all the rulers of the multitude came, and told
Moses.

16:23. And he said to them: This is what the Lord hath spoken: To morrow
is the rest of the sabbath sanctified to the Lord. Whatsoever work is to
be done, do it; and the meats that are to be dressed, dress them; and
whatsoever shall remain, lay it up until the morning.

16:24. And they did so as Moses had commanded, and it did not putrify,
neither was there worm found in it.

16:25. And Moses said: Eat it to day, because it is the sabbath of the
Lord: to day it shall not be found in the field.

16:26. Gather it six days; but on the seventh day is the sabbath of the
Lord, therefore it shall not be found.

16:27. And the seventh day came; and some of the people going forth to
gather, found none.

16:28. And the Lord said to Moses: How long will you refuse to keep my
commandments, and my law?

16:29. See that the Lord hath given you the sabbath, and for this reason
on the sixth day he giveth you a double provision: let each man stay at
home, and let none go forth out of his place the seventh day.

16:30. And the people kept the sabbath on the seventh day.

16:31. And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was
like coriander seed, white, and the taste thereof like to flour with
honey.

16:32. And Moses said: This is the word which the Lord hath commanded:
Fill a gomor of it, and let it be kept unto generations to come
hereafter; that they may know the bread, wherewith I fed you in the
wilderness when you were brought forth out of the land of Egypt.

16:33. And Moses said to Aaron: Take a vessel, and put manna into it, as
much as a gomor can hold; and lay it up before the Lord, to keep unto
your generations,

16:34. As the Lord commanded Moses. And Aaron put it in the tabernacle
to be kept.

16:35. And the children of Israel ate manna forty years, till they came
to a habitable land: with this meat were they fed, until they reached
the borders of the land of Chanaan.

16:36. Now a gomor is the tenth part of an ephi.

Exodus Chapter 17

The people murmur again for want of drink; the Lord giveth them water
out of a rock. Moses lifting up his hand in prayer, Amalec is overcome.

17:1. Then all the multitude of the children of Israel setting forward
from the desert of Sin, by their mansions, according to the word of the
Lord, encamped in Raphidim, where there was no water for the people to
drink.

17:2. And they chode with Moses, and said: Give us water, that we may
drink. And Moses answered them: Why chide you with me? Wherefore do you
tempt the Lord?

17:3. So the people were thirsty there for want of water, and murmured
against Moses, saying: Why didst thou make us go forth out of Egypt, to
kill us and our children, and our beasts with thirst?

17:4. And Moses cried to the Lord, saying: What shall I do to this
people? Yet a little more and they will stone me.

17:5. And the Lord said to Moses: Go before the people, and take with
thee of the ancients of Israel: and take in thy hand the rod wherewith
thou didst strike the river, and go.

17:6. Behold I will stand there before thee, upon the rock Horeb, and
thou shalt strike the rock, and water shall come out of it that the
people may drink. Moses did so before the ancients of Israel:

17:7. And he called the name of that place Temptation, because of the
chiding of the children of Israel, and for that they tempted the Lord,
saying: Is the Lord amongst us or not?

17:8. And Amalec came, and fought against Israel in Raphidim.

17:9. And Moses said to Josue: Choose out men; and go out and fight
against Amalec: tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill, having the
rod of God in my hand.

17:10. Josue did as Moses had spoken, and he fought against Amalec; but
Moses, and Aaron, and Hur, went up upon the top of the hill.

17:11. And when Moses lifted up his hands, Israel overcame; but if he
let them down a little, Amalec overcame.

17:12. And Moses's hands were heavy: so they took a stone, and put under
him, and he sat on it: and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands on both
sides. And it came to pass, that his hands were not weary until sunset.

17:13. And Josue put Amalec and his people to flight, by the edge of the
sword.

17:14. And the Lord said to Moses: Write this for a memorial in a book,
and deliver it to the ears of Josue; for I will destroy the memory of
Amalec from under heaven.

17:15. And Moses built an altar; and called the name thereof, The Lord,
my exaltation, saying:

17:16. Because the hand of the throne of the Lord, and the war of the
Lord shall be against Amalec, from generation to generation.

Exodus Chapter 18

Jethro bringeth to Moses his wife and children. His counsel.

18:1. And when Jethro the priest of Madian, the kinsman of Moses, had
heard all the things that God had done to Moses, and to Israel his
people, and that the Lord had brought forth Israel out of Egypt:

18:2. He took Sephora, the wife of Moses, whom he had sent back:

18:3. And her two sons, of whom one was called Gersam: his father
saying, I have been a stranger in a foreign country.

18:4. And the other Eliezer: For the God of my father, said he, is my
helper, and hath delivered me from the sword of Pharao.

18:5. And Jethro, the kinsman of Moses, came with his sons, and his wife
to Moses into the desert, where he was camped by the mountain of God.

18:6. And he sent word to Moses, saying: I Jethro, thy kinsman, come to
thee, and thy wife, and thy two sons with her.

18:7. And he went out to meet his kinsman, and worshipped and kissed
him: and they saluted one another with words of peace. And when he was
come into the tent,

18:8. Moses told his kinsman all that the Lord had done to Pharao, and
the Egyptians in favour of Israel: and all the labour which had befallen
them in the journey, and that the Lord had delivered them.

18:9. And Jethro rejoiced for all the good things that the Lord had done
to Israel, because he had delivered them out of the hands of the
Egyptians.

18:10. And he said: Blessed is the Lord, who hath delivered his people
out of the hand of Egypt.

18:11. Now I know, that the Lord is great above all gods; because they
dealt proudly against them.

18:12. So Jethro, the kinsman of Moses, offered holocausts and
sacrifices to God: and Aaron and all the ancients of Israel came, to eat
bread with him before God.

18:13. And the next day Moses sat to judge the people, who stood by
Moses from morning until night.

18:14. And when his kinsman had seen all things that he did among the
people, he said: What is it that thou dost among the people? Why sittest
thou alone, and all the people wait from morning till night?

18:15. And Moses answered him: The people come to me to seek the
judgment of God?

18:16. And when any controversy falleth out among them, they come to me
to judge between them, and to shew the precepts of God, and his laws.

18:17. But he said: The thing thou dost is not good.

18:18: Thou art spent with foolish labour, both thou, and this people
that is with thee; the business is above thy strength, thou alone canst
not bear it.

18:19. But hear my words and counsels, and God shall be with thee. Be
thou to the people in those things that pertain to God, to bring their
words to him:

18:20. And to shew the people the ceremonies, and the manner of
worshipping; and the way wherein they ought to walk, and the work that
they ought to do.

18:21. And provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, in
whom there is truth, and that hate avarice, and appoint of them rulers
of thousands, and of hundreds, and of fifties, and of tens,

18:22. Who may judge the people at all times: and when any great matter
soever shall fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them judge the
lesser matters only: that so it may be lighter for thee, the burden
being shared out unto others.

18:23. If thou dost this, thou shalt fulfil the commandment of God, and
shalt be able to bear his precepts: and all this people shall return to
their places with peace.

18:24. And when Moses heard this, he did all things that he had
suggested unto him.

18:25. And choosing able men out of all Israel, he appointed them rulers
of the people, rulers over thousands, and over hundreds, and over
fifties, and over tens.

18:26. And they judged the people at all times: and whatsoever was of
greater difficulty they referred to him, and they judged the easier
cases only.

18:27. And he let his kinsman depart: and he returned and went into his
own country.

Exodus Chapter 19

They come to Sinai: the people are commanded to be sanctified. The Lord,
coming in thunder and lightning, speaketh with Moses.

19:1. In the third month of the departure of Israel out of the land of
Egypt, on this day they came into the wilderness of Sinai:

19:2. For departing out of Raphidim, and coming to the desert of Sinai,
they camped in the same place, and there Israel pitched their tents over
against the mountain.

19:3. And Moses went up to God; and the Lord called unto him from the
mountain, and said: Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell
the children of Israel:

And Moses went up to God... Moses went up to mount Sinai, where God
spoke to him.

19:4. You have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, how I have
carried you upon the wings of eagles, and have taken you to myself.

19:5. If therefore you will hear my voice, and keep my covenant, you
shall be my peculiar possession above all people: for all the earth is
mine.

19:6. And you shall be to me a priestly kingdom, and a holy nation.
These are the words thou shalt speak to the children of Israel.

19:7. Moses came; and calling together the elders of the people, he
declared all the words which the Lord had commanded.

19:8. And all the people answered together: All that the Lord hath
spoken, we will do. And when Moses had related the people's words to the
Lord,

19:9. The Lord said to him: Lo, now will I come to thee in the darkness
of a cloud, that the people may hear me speaking to thee, and may
believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people to the
Lord.

19:10. And he said to him: Go to the people, and sanctify them to day,
and to morrow, and let them wash their garments.

19:11. And let them be ready against the third day; for on the third day
the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people, upon Mount
Sinai.

19:12. And thou shalt appoint certain limits to the people round about,
and thou shalt say to them: Take heed ye go not up into the mount, and
that ye touch not the borders thereof: every one that toucheth the
mount, dying he shall die.

19:13. No hands shall touch him, but he shall be stoned to death, or he
shall be shot through with arrows: whether it be beast, or man, he shall
not live. When the trumpet shall begin to sound, then let them go up
into the mount.

19:14. And Moses came down from the mount to the people, and sanctified
them. And when they had washed their garments,

19:15. He said to them: Be ready against the third day, and come not
near your wives.

19:16. And now the third day was come, and the morning appeared: and
behold thunders began to be heard, and lightning to flash, and a very
thick cloud to cover the mount, and the noise of the trumpet sounded
exceeding loud; and the people that was in the camp, feared.

19:17. And when Moses had brought them forth to meet God, from the place
of the camp, they stood at the bottom of the mount.

19:18. And all Mount Sinai was on a smoke: because the Lord was come
down upon it in fire, and the smoke arose from it as out of a furnace:
and all the mount was terrible.

19:19. And the sound of the trumpet grew by degrees louder and louder,
and was drawn out to a greater length: Moses spoke, and God answered
him.

19:20. And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, in the very top of the
mount, and he called Moses unto the top thereof. And when he was gone up
thither,

19:21. He said unto him: Go down, and charge the people; lest they
should have a mind to pass the limits to see the Lord, and a very great
multitude of them should perish.

19:22. The priests also that come to the Lord, let them be sanctified,
lest he strike them.

19:23. And Moses said to the Lord: The people cannot come up to Mount
Sinai: for thou didst charge, and command, saying: Set limits about the
mount, and sanctify it.

19:24. And the Lord said to him: Go, get thee down; and thou shalt come
up, thou and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people
pass the limits, nor come up to the Lord, lest he kill them.

19:25. And Moses went down to the people and told them all.

Exodus Chapter 20

The ten commandments.

20:1. And the Lord spoke all these words:

20:2. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage.

20:3. Thou shalt not have strange gods before me.

20:4. Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor of those
things that are in the waters under the earth.

A graven thing, nor the likeness of any thing, etc... All such images,
or likenesses, are forbidden by this commandment, as are made to be
adored and served; according to that which immediately follows, thou
shalt not adore them, nor serve them. That is, all such as are designed
for idols or image-gods, or are worshipped with divine honour. But
otherwise images, pictures, or representations, even in the house of
God, and in the very sanctuary so far from being forbidden, are
expressly authorized by the word of God. See Ex. 25.15, and etc.; chap.
38.7; Num. 21.8, 9; 1 Chron. or Paralip. 28.18, 19; 2 Chron. or Paralip.
3.10.

20:5. Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them: I am the Lord thy God,
mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

20:6. And shewing mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

20:7. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that shall take the name of the Lord
his God in vain.

20:8. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day.

20:9. Six days shalt thou labour, and shalt do all thy works.

20:10. But on the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: thou
shalt do no work on it, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy beast, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates.

20:11. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and
all things that are in them, and rested on the seventh day: therefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.

20:12. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thou mayst be longlived
upon the land which the Lord thy God will give thee.

20:13. Thou shalt not kill.

20:14. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

20:15. Thou shalt not steal.

20:16. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

20:17. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house; neither shalt thou
desire his wife, nor his servant, nor his handmaid, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is his.

20:18. And all the people saw the voices and the flames, and the sound
of the trumpet, and the mount smoking; and being terrified and struck
with fear, they stood afar off,

20:19. Saying to Moses: Speak thou to us, and we will hear: let not the
Lord speak to us, lest we die.

20:20. And Moses said to the people: Fear not; for God is come to prove
you, and that the dread of him might be in you, and you should not sin.

20:21. And the people stood afar off. But Moses went to the dark cloud
wherein God was.

20:22. And the Lord said to Moses: Thus shalt thou say to the children
of Israel: You have seen that I have spoken to you from heaven.

20:23. You shall not make gods of silver, nor shall you make to
yourselves gods of gold.

20:24. You shall make an altar of earth unto me, and you shall offer
upon it your holocausts and peace offerings, your sheep and oxen, in
every place where the memory of my name shall be: I will come to thee,
and will bless thee.

20:25. And if thou make an altar of stone unto me, thou shalt not build
it of hewn stones; for if thou lift up a tool upon it, it shall be
defiled.

20:26. Thou shalt not go up by steps unto my altar, lest thy nakedness
be discovered.

Exodus Chapter 21

Laws relating to Justice.

21:1. These are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.

21:2. If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years shall he serve thee; in
the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

21:3. With what raiment he came in, with the like let him go out: if
having a wife, his wife also shall go out with him.

21:4. But if his master gave him a wife, and she hath borne sons and
daughters; the woman and her children shall be her master's: but he
himself shall go out with his raiment.

21:5. And if the servant shall say: I love my master and my wife and
children, I will not go out free:

21:6. His master shall bring him to the gods, and he shall be set to the
door and the posts, and he shall bore his ear through with an awl: and
he shall be his servant for ever.

To the gods... Elohim. That is, to the judges, or magistrates,
authorized by God.

21:7. If any man sell his daughter to be a servant, she shall not go out
as bondwomen are wont to go out.

21:8. If she displease the eyes of her master to whom she was delivered,
he shall let her go: but he shall have no power to sell her to a foreign
nation, if he despise her.

21:9. But if he have betrothed her to his son, he shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters.

21:10. And if he take another wife for him, he shall provide her a
marriage, and raiment, neither shall he refuse the price of her
chastity.

21:11. If he do not these three things, she shall go out free without
money.

21:12. He that striketh a man with a will to kill him, shall be put to
death.

21:13. But he that did not lie in wait for him, but God delivered him
into his hands: I will appoint thee a place to which he must flee.

21:14. If a man kill his neighbour on set purpose, and by lying in wait
for him: thou shalt take him away from my altar that he may die.

21:15. He that striketh his father or mother, shall be put to death.

21:16. He that shall steal a man, and sell him, being convicted of the
guilt, shall be put to death.

21:17. He that curseth his father or mother, shall die the death.

21:18. If men quarrel, and the one strike his neighbour with a stone, or
with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:

21:19. If he rise again and walk abroad upon his staff, he that struck
him shall be quit, yet so that he make restitution for his work, and for
his expenses upon the physicians.

21:20. He that striketh his bondman, or bondwoman, with a rod, and they
die under his hands, shall be guilty of the crime.

21:21. But if the party remain alive a day or two, he shall not be
subject to the punishment, because it is his money.

21:22. If men quarrel, and one strike a woman with child and she
miscarry indeed, but live herself: he shall be answerable for so much
damage as the woman's husband shall require, and as arbiters shall
award.

21:23. But if her death ensue thereupon, he shall render life for life,

21:24. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,

21:25. Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

21:26. If any man strike the eye of his man-servant or maid-servant, and
leave them but one eye, he shall let them go free for the eye which he
put out.

21:27. Also if he strike out a tooth of his man-servant or maid-servant,
he shall in like manner make them free.

21:28. If an ox gore a man or a woman, and they die, he shall be stoned:
and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shall be quit.

21:29. But if the ox was wont to push with his horn yesterday, and the
day before, and they warned his master, and he did not shut him up, and
he shall kill a man or a woman: then the ox shall be stoned, and his
owner also shall be put to death.

21:30. And if they set a price upon him, he shall give for his life
whatsoever is laid upon him.

21:31. If he have gored a son, or a daughter, he shall fall under the
like sentence.

21:32. If he assault a bondman or bondwoman, he shall give thirty sicles
of silver to their master, and the ox shall be stoned.

21:33. If a man open a pit, and dig one, and cover it not, and an ox or
an ass fall into it,

21:34. The owner of the pit shall pay the price of the beasts: and that
which is dead shall be his own.

21:35. If one man's ox gore another man's ox, and he die: they shall
sell the live ox, and shall divide the price, and the carcass of that
which died they shall part between them:

21:36. But if he knew that his ox was wont to push yesterday, and the
day before, and his master did not keep him in; he shall pay ox for ox,
and shall take the whole carcass.

Exodus Chapter 22

The punishment of theft, and other trespasses. The law of lending
without usury, of taking pledges of reverences to superiors, and of
paying tithes.

22:1. If any man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill or sell it: he shall
restore five oxen for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep.

22:2. If a thief be found breaking open a house or undermining it, and
be wounded so as to die: he that slew him shall not be guilty of blood.

22:3. But if he did this when the sun is risen, he hath committed
murder, and he shall die. If he have not wherewith to make restitution
for the theft, he shall be sold.

22:4. If that which he stole be found with him, alive, either ox, or
ass, or sheep: he shall restore double.

22:5. If any man hurt a field or a vineyard, and put in his beast to
feed upon that which is other men's: he shall restore the best of
whatsoever he hath in his own field, or in his vineyard, according to
the estimation of the damage.

22:6. If a fire breaking out light upon thorns, and catch stacks of
corn, or corn standing in the fields, he that kindled the fire shall
make good the loss.

22:7. If a man deliver money, or any vessel unto his friend to keep, and
they be stolen away from him that received them: if the thief be found,
he shall restore double:

22:8. If the thief be not known, the master of the house shall be
brought to the gods, and shall swear that he did not lay his hand upon
his neighbour's goods,

22:9. To do any fraud, either in ox, or in ass, or sheep, or raiment, or
any thing that may bring damage: the cause of both parties shall come to
the gods: and if they give judgment, he shall restore double to his
neighbour.

22:10. If a man deliver ass, ox, sheep, or any beast, to his neighbour's
custody, and it die, or be hurt, or be taken by enemies, and no man saw
it:

22:11. There shall be an oath between them, that he did not put forth
his hand to his neighbour's goods: and the owner shall accept of the
oath, and he shall not be compelled to make restitution.

22:12. But if it were taken away by stealth, he shall make the loss good
to the owner.

22:13. If it were eaten by a beast, let him bring to him that which was
slain, and he shall not make restitution.

22:14. If a man borrow of his neighbour any of these things, and it be
hurt or die, the owner not being present, he shall be obliged to make
restitution.

22:15. But if the owner be present, he shall not make restitution,
especially if it were hired, and came for the hire of his work.

22:16. If a man seduce a virgin not yet espoused, and lie with her: he
shall endow her, and have her to wife.

22:17. If the maid's father will not give her to him, he shall give
money according to the dowry, which virgins are wont to receive.

22:18. Wizards thou shalt not suffer to live.

22:19. Whosoever copulateth with a beast; shall be put to death.

22:20. He that sacrificeth to gods, shall be put to death, save only to
the Lord.

22:21. Thou shalt not molest a stranger, nor afflict him: for yourselves
also were strangers in the land of Egypt.

22:22. You shall not hurt a widow or an orphan.

22:23. If you hurt them, they will cry out to me, and I will hear their
cry:

22:24. And my rage shall be enkindled, and I will strike you with the
sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

22:25. If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor, that
dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be hard upon them as an extortioner,
nor oppress them with usuries.

22:26. If thou take of thy neighbour a garment in pledge, thou shalt
give it him again before sunset.

22:27. For that same is the only thing, wherewith he is covered, the
clothing of his body, neither hath he any other to sleep in: if he cry
to me, I will hear him, because I am compassionate.

22:28. Thou shalt not speak ill of the gods, and the prince of thy
people thou shalt not curse.

22:29. Thou shalt not delay to pay thy tithes and thy firstfruits: thou
shalt give the firstborn of thy sons to me.

22:30. Thou shalt do the same with the firstborn of thy oxen also and
sheep: seven days let it be with its dam: the eighth day thou shalt give
it to me.

22:31. You shall be holy men to me: the flesh that beasts have tasted of
before, you shall not eat, but shall cast it to the dogs.

Exodus Chapter 23

Laws for judges; the rest of the seventh year, and day: three principal
feasts to be solemnized every year; the promise of an angel, to conduct
and protect them: idols are to be destroyed.

23:1. Thou shalt not receive the voice of a lie: neither shalt thou join
thy hand to bear false witness for a wicked person.

23:2. Thou shalt not follow the multitude to do evil: neither shalt thou
yield in judgment, to the opinion of the most part, to stray from the
truth.

23:3. Neither shalt thou favour a poor man in judgment.

23:4. If thou meet thy enemy's ox or ass going astray, bring it back to
him.

23:5. If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lie underneath his
burden, thou shalt not pass by, but shalt lift him up with him.

23:6. Thou shalt not go aside in the poor man's judgment.

23:7. Thou shalt fly lying. The innocent and just person thou shalt not
put to death: because I abhor the wicked.

23:8. Neither shalt thou take bribes, which even blind the wise, and
pervert the words of the just.

23:9. Thou shalt not molest a stranger, for you know the hearts of
strangers: for you also were strangers in the land of Egypt.

23:10. Six years thou shalt sow thy ground, and shalt gather the corn
thereof.

23:11. But the seventh year thou shalt let it alone, and suffer it to
rest, that the poor of thy people may eat, and whatsoever shall be left,
let the beasts of the field eat it: so shalt thou do with thy vineyard
and thy oliveyard.

23:12. Six days thou shalt work: the seventh day thou shalt cease, that
thy ox and thy ass may rest: and the son of thy handmaid and the
stranger may be refreshed.

23:13. Keep all things that I have said to you. And by the name of
strange gods you shall not swear, neither shall it be heard out of your
mouth.

23:14. Three times every year you shall celebrate feasts to me.

23:15. Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days shalt
thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month
of new corn, when thou didst come forth out of Egypt: thou shalt not
appear empty before me.

23:16. And the feast of the harvest of the firstfruits of thy work,
whatsoever thou hast sown in the field. The feast also in the end of the
year, when thou hast gathered in all thy corn out of the field.

23:17. Thrice a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God.

23:18. Thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of my victim upon leaven,
neither shall the fat of my solemnity remain until the morning.

23:19. Thou shalt carry the first-fruits of the corn of thy ground to
the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of
his dam.

23:20. Behold I will send my angel, who shall go before thee, and keep
thee in thy journey, and bring thee into the place that I have prepared.

23:21. Take notice of him, and hear his voice, and do not think him one
to be contemned: for he will not forgive when thou hast sinned, and my
name is in him.

23:22. But if thou wilt hear hi voice, and do all that I speak, I will
be an enemy to thy enemies, and will afflict them that afflict thee.

23:23. And my angel shall go before thee, and shall bring thee in unto
the Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherexite, and the Chanaanite,
and the Hevite, and the Jebuzite, whom I will destroy.

23:24. Thou shalt not adore their gods, nor serve them. Thou shalt not
do their works, but shalt destroy them, and break their statues.

23:25. And you shall serve the Lord your God, that I may bless your
bread and your waters, and may take away sickness from the midst of
thee.

23:26. There shall not be one fruitless nor barren in thy land: I will
fill the number of thy days.

23:27. I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people
to whom thou shalt come: and will turn the backs of all thy enemies
before thee:

23:28. Sending out hornets before, that shall drive away the Hevite, and
the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, before thou come in.

23:29. I will not cast them out from thy face in one year; lest the land
be brought into a wilderness, and the beasts multiply against thee.

23:30. By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, till
thou be increased, and dost possess the land.

23:31. And I will set thy bounds from the Red Sea to the sea of the
Palestines, and from the desert to the river: I will deliver the
inhabitants of the land into your hands, and will drive them out from
before you.

23:32. Thou shalt not enter into league with them, nor with their gods.

23:33. Let them not dwell in thy land, lest perhaps they make thee sin
against me, if thou serve their gods; which, undoubtedly, will be a
scandal to thee.

Exodus Chapter 24

Moses writeth his law; and after offering sacrifices, sprinkleth the
blood of the testament upon the people: then goeth up the mountain which
God covereth with a fiery cloud.

24:1. And he said to Moses: Come up to the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab
and Abiu, and seventy of the ancients of Israel, and you shall adore
afar off.

24:2. And Moses alone shall come up to the Lord, but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people come up with him.

24:3. So Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice: We will
do all the words of the Lord, which he hath spoken.

24:4. And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord: and rising in the
morning, he built an altar at the foot of the mount, and twelve titles
according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

Titles... That is, pillars.

24:5. And he sent young men of the children of Israel, and they offered
holocausts, and sacrificed pacific victims of calves to the Lord.

Holocausts... Whole burnt offerings, in which the whole sacrifice was
consumed with fire upon the altar.

24:6. Then Moses took half of the blood, and put it into bowls; and the
rest he poured upon the altar.

24:7. And taking the book of the covenant, he read it in the hearing of
the people: and they said: All things that the Lord hath spoken, we will
do, we will be obedient.

24:8. And he took the blood and sprinkled it upon the people, and he
said: This is the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9. Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abiu, and seventy of the ancients
of Israel went up:

24:10. And they saw the God of Israel: and under his feet as it were a
work of sapphire stone, and as the heaven, when clear.

24:11. Neither did he lay his hand upon those of the children of Israel,
that retired afar off, and they saw God, and they did eat and drink.

24:12. And the Lord said to Moses: Come up to me into the mount, and be
there; and I will give thee tables of stone, and the law, and the
commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13. Moses rose up, and his minister Josue: and Moses going up into
the mount of God,

24:14. Said to the ancients: Wait ye here till we return to you. You
have Aaron and Hur with you: if any question shall arise, you shall
refer it to them.

24:15. And when Moses was gone up, a cloud covered the mount.

24:16. And the glory of the Lord dwelt upon Sinai, covering it with a
cloud six days: and the seventh day he called him out of the midst of
the cloud.

24:17. And the sight of the glory of the Lord, was like a burning fire
upon the top of the mount, in the eyes of the children of Israel.

24:18. And Moses entering into the midst of the cloud, went up into the
mountain: And he was there forty days and forty nights.

Exodus Chapter 25

Offerings prescribed for making the tabernacle, the ark, the
candlestick, etc.

25:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

25:2. Speak to the children of Israel, that they bring firstfruits to
me: of every man that offereth of his own accord, you shall take them.

Firstfruits... Offerings of some of the best and choicest of their
goods.

25:3. And these are the things you must take: Gold, and silver, and
brass,

25:4. Violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, and
goats' hair,

25:5. And rams' skins dyed red, and violet skins, and setim wood:

Setim wood... The wood of a tree that grows in the wilderness, which is
said to be incorruptible.

25:6. Oil to make lights: spices for ointment, and for sweetsmelling
incense:

25:7. Onyx stones, and precious stones to adorn the ephod and the
rational.

The ephod and the rational... The ephod was the high priest's upper
vestment; and the rational his vestplate, in which were twelve gems,
etc.

25:8. And they shall make me a sanctuary, and I will dwell in the midst
of them:

25:9. According to all the likeness of the tabernacle which I will shew
thee, and of all the vessels for the service thereof: and thus you shall
make it:

25:10. Frame an ark of setim wood, the length whereof shall be of two
cubits and a half; the breadth, a cubit and a half; the height,
likewise, a cubit and a half.

25:11. And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold, within and
without; and over it thou shalt make a golden crown round about:

25:12. And four golden rings, which thou shalt put at the four corners
of the ark: let two rings be on the one side, and two on the other.

25:13. Thou shalt make bars also of setim wood, and shalt overlay them
with gold.

25:14. And thou shalt put them in through the rings that are in the
sides of the ark, that it may be carried on them:

25:15. And they shall be always in the rings, neither shall they at any
time be drawn out of them.

25:16. And thou shalt put in the ark the testimony which I will give
thee.

25:17. Thou shalt make also a propitiatory of the purest gold: the
length thereof shall be two cubits and a half, and the breadth a cubit
and a half.

A propitiatory... a covering for the ark: called a propitiatory, or
mercy seat, because the Lord, who was supposed to sit there upon the
wings of the cherubims, with the ark for his footstool, from thence
shewed mercy. It is also called the oracle, ver. 18 and 20; because from
thence God gave his orders and his answers.

25:18. Thou shalt make also two cherubims of beaten gold, on the two
sides of the oracle.

25:19. Let one cherub be on the one side, and the other on the other.

25:20. Let them cover both sides of the propitiatory, spreading their
wings, and covering the oracle, and let them look one towards the other,
their faces being turned towards the propitiatory wherewith the ark is
to be covered.

25:21. In which thou shalt put the testimony that I will give thee.

25:22. Thence will I give orders, and will speak to thee over the
propitiatory, and from the midst of the two cherubims, which shall be
upon the ark of the testimony, all things which I will command the
children of Israel by thee.

25:23. Thou shalt make a table also of setim wood, of two cubits in
length, and a cubit in breadth, and a cubit and a half in height.

A table... On which were to be placed the twelve loaves of proposition:
or, as they are called in the Hebrew, the face bread, because they were
always to stand before the face of the Lord in his temple: as a figure
of the eucharistic sacrifice and sacrament, in the church of Christ.

25:24. And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold: and thou shalt
make to it a golden ledge round about.

25:25. And to the ledge itself a polished crown, four inches high; and
over the same another little golden crown.

25:26. Thou shalt prepare also four golden rings, and shalt put them in
the four corners of the same table, over each foot.

25:27. Under the crown shall the golden rings be, that the bars may be
put through them, and the table may be carried.

25:28. The bars also themselves thou shalt make of setim wood, and shalt
overlay them with gold, to bear up the table.

25:29. Thou shalt prepare also dishes, and bowls, censers, and cups,
wherein the libations are to be offered, of the purest gold.

Libations... That is, drink offerings.

25:30. And thou shalt set upon the table loaves of proposition in my
sight always.

25:31. Thou shalt make also a candlestick of beaten work, of the finest
gold, the shaft thereof, and the branches, the cups, and the bowls, and
the lilies going forth from it.

A candlestick... This candlestick, with its seven lamps, which was
always to give light in the house of God, was a figure of the light of
the Holy Ghost, and his sevenfold grace, in the sanctuary of the church
of Christ.

25:32. Six branches shall come out of the sides, three out of one side,
and three out of the other.

25:33. Three cups as it were nuts to every branch, and a bowl withal,
and a lily: and three cups likewise of the fashion of nuts in the other
branch, and a bowl withal, and a lily. Such shall be the work of the six
branches, that are to come out from the shaft:

25:34. And in the candlestick itself shall be four cups in the manner of
a nut, and at every one bowls and lilies.

25:35. Bowls under two branches in three places, which together make
six, coming forth out of one shaft.

25:36. And both the bowls and the branches shall be of the same beaten
work of the purest gold.

25:37. Thou shalt make also seven lamps, and shalt set them upon the
candlestick, to give light over against.

25:38. The snuffers also, and where the snuffings shall be put out,
shall be made of the purest gold.

25:39. The whole weight of the candlestick, with all the furniture
thereof, shall be a talent of the purest gold.

25:40. Look, and make it according to the pattern that was shewn thee in
the mount.

Exodus Chapter 26

The form of the tabernacle with its appurtenances.

26:1. And thou shalt make the tabernacle in this manner: Thou shalt make
ten curtains of fine twisted linen, and violet and purple, and scarlet
twice dyed, diversified with embroidery.

26:2. The length of one curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits; the
breadth shall be four cubits. All the curtains shall be of one measure.

26:3. Five curtains shall be joined one to another, and the other five
shall be coupled together in like manner.

26:4. Thou shalt make loops of violet in the sides and tops of the
curtains, that they may be joined one to another.

26:5. Every curtain shall have fifty loops on both sides, so set on,
that one loop may be against another loop, and one may be fitted to the
other.

26:6. Thou shalt make also fifty rings of gold, wherewith the veils of
the curtains are to be joined, that it may be made one tabernacle.

26:7. Thou shalt make also eleven curtains of goats' hair, to cover the
top of the tabernacle.

26:8. The length of one hair-curtain shall be thirty cubits; and the
breadth, four: the measure of all the curtains shall be equal.

26:9. Five of which thou shalt couple by themselves, and the six others
thou shalt couple one to another, so as to double the sixth curtain in
the front of the roof.

26:10. Thou shalt make also fifty loops in the edge of one curtain, that
it may be joined with the other: and fifty loops in the edge of the
other curtain, that it may be coupled with its fellow.

26:11. Thou shalt make also fifty buckles of brass, wherewith the loops
may be joined, that of all there may be made one covering.

26:12. And that which shall remain of the curtains, that are prepared
for the roof, to wit, one curtain that is over and above, with the half
thereof thou shalt cover the back parts of the tabernacle.

26:13. And there shall hang down a cubit on the one side, and another on
the other side, which is over and above in the length of the curtains,
fencing both sides of the tabernacle.

26:14. Thou shalt make also another cover to the roof of rams' skins
dyed red: and over that again another cover of violet coloured skins.

26:15. Thou shalt make also the boards of the tabernacle standing
upright of setim wood.

26:16. Let every one of them be ten cubits in length, and in breadth one
cubit and a half.

26:17. In the sides of the boards shall be made two mortises, whereby
one board may be joined to another board: and after this manner shall
all the boards be prepared.

26:18. Of which twenty shall be in the south side southward.

26:19. For which thou shalt cast forty sockets of silver, that under
every board may be put two sockets at the two corners.

26:20. In the second side also of the tabernacle that looketh to the
north, there shall be twenty boards,

26:21. Having forty sockets of silver, two sockets shall be put under
each board.

26:22. But on the west side of the tabernacle thou shalt make six
boards.

26:23. And again other two which shall be erected in the corners at the
back of the tabernacle.

26:24. And they shall be joined together from beneath unto the top, and
one joint shall hold them all. The like joining shall be observed for
the two boards also that are to be put in the corners.

26:25. And they shall be in all eight boards, and their silver sockets
sixteen, reckoning two sockets for each board.

26:26. Thou shalt make also five bars of setim wood, to hold together
the boards on one side of the tabernacle.

26:27. And five others on the other side, and as many at the west side:

26:28. And they shall be put along by the midst of the boards, from one
end to the other.

26:29. The boards also themselves thou shalt overlay with gold, and
shalt cast rings of gold to be set upon them, for places for the bars to
hold together the boardwork: which bars thou shalt cover with plates of
gold.

26:30. And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the pattern
that was shewn thee in the mount.

26:31. Thou shalt make also a veil of violet, and purple, and scarlet
twice dyed, and fine twisted linen, wrought with embroidered work and
goodly variety:

26:32. And thou shalt hang it up before four pillars of setim wood,
which themselves also shall be overlaid with gold, and shall have heads
of gold, but sockets of silver.

26:33. And the veil shall be hanged on with rings, and within it thou
shalt put the ark of the testimony, and the sanctuary and the holy of
the holies shall be divided with it.

The sanctuary, etc... That part of the tabernacle, which was without the
veil, into which the priests daily entered, is here called the
sanctuary, or holy place; that part which was within the veil, into
which no one but the high priest ever went, and he but once a year, is
called the holy of holies, (literally, the sanctuary of the
sanctuaries,) as being the most holy of all holy places.

26:34. And thou shalt set the propitiatory upon the ark of the
testimony, in the holy of holies.

26:35. And the table without the veil, and over against the table the
candlestick in the south side of the tabernacle: for the table shall
stand in the north side.

26:36. Thou shalt make also a hanging in the entrance of the tabernacle
of violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen
with embroidered work.

26:37. And thou shalt overlay with gold five pillars of setim wood,
before which the hanging shall be drawn: their heads shall be of gold,
and the sockets of brass.

Exodus Chapter 27

The altar; and the court of the tabernacle with its hangings and
pillars. Provision of oil for lamps.

27:1. Thou shalt make also an altar of setim wood, which shall be five
cubits long, and as many broad, that is four square, and three cubits
high.

27:2. And there shall be horns at the four corners of the same: and thou
shalt cover it with brass.

27:3. And thou shalt make for the uses thereof pans to receive the
ashes, and tongs and fleshhooks, and firepans: all its vessels thou
shalt make of brass.

27:4. And a grate of brass in manner of a net; at the four corners of
which, shall be four rings of brass,

27:5. Which thou shalt put under the hearth of the altar: and the grate
shall be even to the midst of the altar.

27:6. Thou shalt make also two bars for the altar, of setim wood, which
thou shalt cover with plates of brass:

27:7. And thou shalt draw them through rings, and they shall be on both
sides of the altar to carry it.

27:8. Thou shalt not make it solid, but empty and hollow in the inside,
as it was shewn thee in the mount.

27:9. Thou shalt make also the court of the tabernacle, in the south
side whereof southward there shall be hangings of fine twisted linen of
a hundred cubits long for one side.

27:10. And twenty pillars with as many sockets of brass, the heads of
which, with their engraving, shall be of silver.

27:11. In like manner also on the north side there shall be hangings of
a hundred cubits long, twenty pillars, and as many sockets of brass, and
their heads with their engraving of silver.

27:12. But in the breadth of the court, that looketh to the west, there
shall be hangings of fifty cubits, and ten pillars, and as many sockets.

27:13. In that breadth also of the court, which looketh to the east,
there shall be fifty cubits.

27:14. In which there shall be for one side, hangings of fifteen cubits,
and three pillars, and as many sockets.

27:15. And in the other side, there shall be hangings of fifteen cubits,
with three pillars, and as many sockets.

27:16. And in the entrance of the court there shall be made a hanging of
twenty cubits of violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine
twisted linen, with embroidered work: it shall have four pillars, with
as many sockets.

27:17. All the pillars of the court round about shall be garnished with
plates of silver, silver heads, and sockets of brass.

27:18. In length the court shall take up a hundred cubits, in breadth
fifty, the height shall be of five cubits, and it shall be made of fine
twisted linen, and shall have sockets of brass.

27:19. All the vessels of the tabernacle for all uses and ceremonies,
and the pins both of it and of the court, thou shalt make of brass.

27:20. Command the children of Israel that they bring thee the purest
oil of the olives, and beaten with a pestle: that a lamp may burn
always,

27:21. In the tabernacle of the testimony, without the veil that hangs
before the testimony. And Aaron and his sons shall order it, that it may
give light before the Lord until the morning. It shall be a perpetual
observance throughout their successions among the children of Israel.

Exodus Chapter 28

The holy vestments for Aaron and his sons.

28:1. Take unto thee also Aaron thy brother with his sons, from among
the children of Israel, that they may minister to me in the priest's
office: Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

28:2. And thou shalt make a holy vesture for Aaron, thy brother, for
glory and for beauty.

28:3. And thou shalt speak to all the wise of heart, whom I have filled
with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's vestments, in
which he being consecrated, may minister to me.

28:4. And these shall be the vestments that they shall make: A rational
and an ephod, a tunic and a strait linen garment, a mitre and a girdle.
They shall make the holy vestments for thy brother Aaron and his sons,
that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.

28:5. And they shall take gold, and violet, and purple, and scarlet
twice dyed, and fine linen.

28:6. And they shall make the ephod of gold, and violet, and purple, and
scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen, embroidered with divers
colours.

28:7. It shall have the two edges joined in the top on both sides, that
they may be closed together.

28:8. The very workmanship also, and all the variety of the work, shall
be of gold, and violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine
twisted linen.

28:9. And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and shalt grave on them the
names of the children of Israel:

28:10. Six names on one stone, and the other six on the other, according
to the order of their birth.

28:11. With the work of an engraver, and the graving of a jeweller, thou
shalt engrave them with the names of the children of Israel, set in gold
and compassed about:

28:12. And thou shalt put them in both sides of the ephod, a memorial
for the children of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before the
Lord upon both shoulders, for a remembrance.

28:13. Thou shalt make also hooks of gold.

28:14. And two little chains of the purest gold, linked one to another,
which thou shalt put into the hooks.

28:15. And thou shalt make the rational of judgment with embroidered
work of divers colours, according to the workmanship of the ephod, of
gold, violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted
linen.

The rational of judgment... This part of the priest's attire, which he
wore at his breast, was called the rational of judgment; partly because
it admonished both priest and people of their duty to God, by carrying
the names of all their tribes in his presence; and by the Urim and the
Thummim, that is, doctrine and truth, which were written upon it; and
partly because it gave divine answers and oracles, as if it were
rational and endowed with judgment.

28:16. It shall be four square and doubled: it shall be the measure of a
span both in length and in breadth.

28:17. And thou shalt set in it four rows of stones. In the first row
shall be a sardius stone, and a topaz, and an emerald:

28:18. In the second a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a jasper:

28:19. In the third a ligurius, an agate, and an amethyst:

28:20. In the fourth a chrysolite, an onyx, and a beryl. They shall be
set in gold by their rows.

28:21. And they shall have the names of the children of Israel: with
twelve names shall they be engraved, each stone with the name of one
according to the twelve tribes.

28:22. And thou shalt make on the rational chains, linked one to
another, of the purest gold:

28:23. And two rings of gold, which thou shalt put in the two ends at
the top of the rational.

28:24. And the golden chains thou shalt join to the rings, that are in
the ends thereof.

28:25. And the ends of the chains themselves, thou shalt join together
with two hooks, on both sides of the ephod, which is towards the
rational.

28:26. Thou shalt make also two rings of gold, which thou shalt put in
the top parts of the rational, in the borders that are over against the
ephod, and look towards the back parts thereof.

28:27. Moreover also other two rings of gold, which are to be set on
each side of the ephod beneath, that looketh towards the nether joining,
that the rational may be fitted with the ephod,

28:28. And may be fastened by the rings thereof unto the rings of the
ephod with a violet fillet, that the joining artificially wrought may
continue, and the rational and the ephod may not be loosed one from the
other.

28:29. And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the
rational of judgment upon his breast, when he shall enter into the
sanctuary, a memorial before the Lord for ever.

28:30. And thou shalt put in the rational of judgment doctrine and
truth, which shall be on Aaron's breast, when he shall go in before the
Lord: and he shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel on his
breast, in the sight of the Lord always.

Doctrine and Truth... Hebrew, Urim and Thummim: illuminations and
perfections. These words, written on the rational, seem to signify the
light of doctrine and the integrity of life, with which the priests of
God ought to approach him.

28:31. And thou shalt make the tunic of the ephod all of violet,

28:32. In the midst whereof above shall be a hole for the head, and a
border round about it woven, as is wont to be made in the outmost parts
of garments, that it may not easily be broken.

28:33. And beneath at the feet of the same tunic, round about, thou
shalt make as it were pomegranates, of violet, and purple, and scarlet
twice dyed, with little bells set between:

28:34. So that there shall be a golden bell and a pomegranate, and again
another golden bell and a pomegranate.

28:35. And Aaron shall be vested with it in the office of his ministry,
that the sound may be heard, when he goeth in and cometh out of the
sanctuary, in the sight of the Lord, and that he may not die.

28:36. Thou shalt make also a plate of the purest gold: wherein thou
shalt grave with engraver's work, Holy to the Lord.

28:37. And thou shalt tie it with a violet fillet, and it shall be upon
the mitre,

28:38. Hanging over the forehead of the high priest. And Aaron shall
bear the iniquities of those things, which the children of Israel have
offered and sanctified, in all their gifts and offerings. And the plate
shall be always on his forehead, that the Lord may be well pleased with
them.

28:39. And thou shalt gird the tunic with fine linen, and thou shalt
make a fine linen mitre, and a girdle of embroidered work.

28:40. Moreover, for the sons of Aaron thou shalt prepare linen tunics,
and girdles and mitres for glory and beauty:

28:41. And with all these things thou shalt vest Aaron thy brother, and
his sons with him. And thou shalt consecrate the hands of them all, and
shalt sanctify them, that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.

28:42. Thou shalt make also linen breeches, to cover the flesh of their
nakedness, from the reins to the thighs:

28:43. And Aaron and his sons shall use them when they shall go into the
tabernacle of the testimony, or when they approach to the altar to
minister in the sanctuary, lest being guilty of iniquity they die. It
shall be a law for ever to Aaron, and to his seed after him.

Exodus Chapter 29

The manner of consecrating Aaron and other priests; the institution of
the daily sacrifice of two lambs, one in the morning, the other at
evening.

29:1. And thou shalt also do this, that they may be consecrated to me in
priesthood. Take a calf from the herd, and two rams without blemish,

29:2. And unleavened bread, and a cake without leaven, tempered with
oil, wafers also unleavened, anointed with oil: thou shalt make them all
of wheaten flour.

29:3. And thou shalt put them in a basket, and offer them: and the calf
and the two rams.

29:4. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the
tabernacle of the testimony. And when thou hast washed the father and
his sons with water,

29:5. Thou shalt clothe Aaron with his vestments, that is, with the
linen garment and the tunic, and the ephod and the rational, which thou
shalt gird with the girdle.

29:6. And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and the holy plate
upon the mitre,

29:7. And thou shalt pour the oil of unction upon his head: and by this
rite shall he be consecrated.

29:8. Thou shalt bring his sons also, and shalt put on them the linen
tunics, and gird them with a girdle:

29:9. To wit, Aaron and his children, and thou shalt put mitres upon
them; and they shall be priests to me by a perpetual ordinance. After
thou shalt have consecrated their hands,

29:10. Thou shalt present also the calf before the tabernacle of the
testimony. And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon his head,

29:11. And thou shalt kill him in the sight of the Lord, beside the door
of the tabernacle of the testimony.

29:12. And taking some of the blood of the calf, thou shalt put it upon
the horns of the altar with thy finger, and the rest of the blood thou
shalt pour at the bottom thereof.

29:13. Thou shalt take also all the fat that covereth the entrails, and
the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon
them, and shalt offer a burn offering upon the altar:

29:14. But the flesh of the calf, and the hide and the dung, thou shalt
burn abroad, without the camp, because it is for sin.

29:15. Thou shalt take also one ram, upon the head whereof Aaron and his
sons shall lay their hands.

29:16. And when thou hast killed him, thou shalt take of the blood
thereof, and pour round about the altar.

29:17. And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and having washed his
entrails and feet, thou shalt put them upon the flesh that is cut in
pieces, and upon his head.

29:18. And thou shalt offer the whole ram for a burnt offering upon the
altar: it is an oblation to the Lord, a most sweet savour of the victim
of the Lord.

29:19. Thou shalt take also the other ram, upon whose head Aaron and his
sons shall lay their hands.

29:20. And when thou hast sacrificed him, thou shalt take of his blood,
and put upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and of his sons, and upon
the thumbs and great toes of their right hand and foot, and thou shalt
pour the blood upon the altar round about.

29:21. And when thou hast taken of the blood that is upon the altar, and
of the oil of unction, thou shalt sprinkle Aaron and his vesture, his
sons and their vestments. And after they and their vestments are
consecrated,

29:22. Thou shalt take the fat of the ram, and the rump, and the fat
that covereth the lungs, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys,
and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder, because it is the
ram of consecration:

29:23. And one roll of bread, a cake tempered with oil, a wafer out of
the basket of unleavened bread, which is set in the sight of the Lord:

29:24. And thou shalt put all upon the hands of Aaron and of his sons,
and shalt sanctify them elevating before the Lord.

29:25. And thou shalt take all from their hands; and shalt burn them
upon the altar for a holocaust, a most sweet savour in the sight of the
Lord, because it is his oblation.

29:26. Thou shalt take also the breast of the ram, wherewith Aaron was
consecrated, and elevating it thou shalt sanctify it before the Lord,
and it shall fall to thy share.

29:27. And thou shalt sanctify both the consecrated breast, and the
shoulder that thou didst separate of the ram,

29:28. Wherewith Aaron was consecrated and his sons, and they shall fall
to Aaron's share, and his sons', by a perpetual right from the children
of Israel: because they are the choicest and the beginnings of their
peace victims which they offer to the Lord.

29:29. And the holy vesture, which Aaron shall use, his sons shall have
after him, that they may be anointed, and their hands consecrated in it.

29:30. He of his sons that shall be appointed high priest in his stead,
and that shall enter into the tabernacle of the testimony to minister in
the sanctuary, shall wear it seven days.

29:31. And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and shalt boil
the flesh thereof in the holy place:

29:32. And Aaron and his sons shall eat it. The loaves also, that are in
the basket, they shall eat in the entry of the tabernacle of the
testimony,

29:33. That it may be an atoning sacrifice, and the hands of the
offerers may be sanctified. A stranger shall not eat of them, because
they are holy.

29:34. And if there remain of the consecrated flesh, or of the bread,
till the morning, thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: they shall
not be eaten, because they are sanctified.

29:35. All that I have commanded thee, thou shalt do unto Aaron and his
sons. Seven days shalt thou consecrate their hands:

29:36. And thou shalt offer a calf for sin every day for expiation. And
thou shalt cleanse the altar when thou hast offered the victim of
expiation, and shalt anoint it to sanctify it.

29:37. Seven days shalt thou expiate the altar and sanctify it, and it
shall be most holy. Every one, that shall touch it, shall be holy.

29:38. This is what thou shalt sacrifice upon the altar: Two lambs of a
year old every day continually,

29:39. One lamb in the morning, and another in the evening.

29:40. With one lamb a tenth part of flour tempered with beaten oil, of
the fourth part of a hin, and wine for libation of the same measure.

29:41. And the other lamb thou shalt offer in the evening, according to
the rite of the morning oblation, and according to what we have said,
for a savour of sweetness:

29:42. It is a sacrifice to the Lord, by perpetual oblation unto your
generations, at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony before the
Lord, where I will appoint to speak unto thee.

29:43. And there will I command the children of Israel, and the altar
shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44. I will sanctify also the tabernacle of the testimony with the
altar, and Aaron with his sons, to do the office of priesthood unto me.

29:45. And I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, and will
be their God:

29:46. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, who have
brought them out of the land of Egypt, that I might abide among them, I
the Lord their God.

Exodus Chapter 30

The altar of incense: money to be gathered for the use of the
tabernacle: the brazen laver: the holy oil of unction, and the
composition of the perfume.

30:1. Thou shalt make also an altar to burn incense, of setim wood.

An altar to burn incense... This burning of incense was an emblem of
prayer, ascending to God from an inflamed heart. See Ps. 140.2; Apoc.
5.8, and 8.4.

30:2. It shall be a cubit in length, and another in breadth, that is,
four square, and two in height. Horns shall go out of the same.

30:3. And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold, as well the grate
thereof, as the walls round about, and the horns. And thou shalt make to
it a crown of gold round about,

30:4. And two golden rings under the crown on either side, that the bars
may be put into them, and the altar be carried.

30:5. And thou shalt make the bars also of setim wood, and shalt overlay
them with gold.

30:6. And thou shalt set the altar over against the veil, that hangeth
before the ark of the testimony before the propitiatory wherewith the
testimony is covered, where I will speak to thee.

30:7. And Aaron shall burn sweet smelling incense upon it in the
morning. When he shall dress the lamps, he shall burn it:

30:8. And when he shall place them in the evening, he shall burn an
everlasting incense before the Lord throughout your generations.

30:9. You shall not offer upon it incense of another composition, nor
oblation, and victim, neither shall you offer libations.

30:10. And Aaron shall pray upon the horns thereof once a year, with the
blood of that which was offered for sin; and shall make atonement upon
it in your generations. It shall be most holy to the Lord.

30:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

30:12. When thou shalt take the sum of the children of Israel, according
to their number, every one of them shall give a price for their souls to
the Lord, and there shall be no scourge among them, when they shall be
reckoned.

30:13. And this shall every one give that passeth at the naming, half a
sicle according to the standard of the temple. A sicle hath twenty
obols. Half a sicle shall be offered to the Lord.

Half a sicle... A sicle or shekel of silver, (which was also called a
stater,) according to the standard or weight of the sanctuary, which was
the most just and exact, was half an ounce of silver, that is, about
half a crown of English money. The obol, or gerah, was about three
halfpence.

30:14. He that is counted in the number from twenty years and upwards,
shall give the price.

30:15. The rich man shall not add to half a sicle, and the poor man
shall diminish nothing.

30:16. And the money received, which was contributed by the children of
Israel, thou shalt deliver unto the uses of the tabernacle of the
testimony, that it may be a memorial of them before the Lord, and he may
be merciful to their souls.

30:17. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

30:18. Thou shalt make also a brazen laver with its foot to wash in: and
thou shalt set it between the tabernacle of the testimony and the altar.
And water being put into it:

30:19. Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and feet in it:

30:20. When they are going into the tabernacle of the testimony, and
when they are to come to the altar, to offer on it incense to the Lord,

30:21. Lest perhaps they die. It shall be an everlasting law to him, and
to his seed by successions.

30:22. And the Lord spoke to Moses,

30:23. Saying: Take spices, of principal and chosen myrrh five hundred
sicles, and of cinnamon half so much; that is, two hundred and fifty
sicles, of calamus in like manner two hundred and fifty,

30:24. And of cassia five hundred sicles by the weight of the sanctuary,
of oil of olives the measure hin:

30:25. And thou shalt make the holy oil of unction, an ointment
compounded after the art of the perfumer,

30:26. And therewith thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the testimony,
and the ark of the testament,

30:27. And the table with the vessels thereof, the candlestick and
furniture thereof, the altars of incense,

30:28. And of holocaust, and all the furniture that belongeth to the
service of them.

30:29. And thou shalt sanctify all, and they shall be most holy: he that
shall touch them shall be sanctified.

30:30. Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and shalt sanctify them,
that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.

30:31. And thou shalt say to the children of Israel: This oil of unction
shall be holy unto me throughout your generations.

30:32. The flesh of man shall not be anointed therewith, and you shall
make none other of the same composition, because it is sanctified, and
shall be holy unto you.

30:33. What man soever shall compound such, and shall give thereof to a
stranger, he shall be cut off from his people.

30:34. And the Lord said to Moses: Take unto thee spices, stacte, and
onycha, galbanum of sweet savour, and the clearest frankincense, all
shall be of equal weight.

30:35. And thou shalt make incense compounded by the work of the
perfumer, well tempered together, and pure, and most worthy of
sanctification.

30:36. And when thou hast beaten all into very small powder, thou shalt
set of it before the tabernacle of the testimony, in the place where I
will appear to thee. Most holy shall this incense be unto you.

30:37. You shall not make such a composition for your own uses, because
it is holy to the Lord.

30:38. What man soever shall make the like, to enjoy the smell thereof,
he shall perish out of his people.

Exodus Chapter 31

Beseleel and Ooliab are appointed by the Lord to make the tabernacle,
and the things belonging thereto. The observation of the sabbath day is
again commanded. And the Lord delivereth to Moses two tables written
with the finger of God.

31:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

31:2. Behold, I have called by name Beseleel the son of Uri, the son of
Hur, of the tribe of Juda,

31:3. And I have filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom and
understanding, and knowledge in all manner of work,

31:4. To devise whatsoever may be artificially made of gold, and silver,
and brass,

31:5. Of marble, and precious stones, and variety of wood.

31:6. And I have given him for his companion Ooliab, the son of
Achisamech, of the tribe of Dan. And I have put wisdom in the heart of
every skilful man, that they may make all things which I have commanded
thee,

31:7. The tabernacle of the covenant, and the ark of the testimony, and
the propitiatory, that is over it, and all the vessels of the
tabernacle,

31:8. And the table and the vessels thereof, the most pure candlestick
with the vessels thereof, and the altars of incense,

31:9. And of holocaust, and all their vessels, the laver with its foot,

31:10. The holy vestments in the ministry for Aaron the priest, and for
his sons, that they may execute their office, about the sacred things:

31:11. The oil of unction, and the incense of spices in the sanctuary,
all things which I have commanded thee, shall they make.

31:12. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

31:13. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: See
that you keep my sabbath; because it is a sign between me and you in
your generations that you may know that I am the Lord, who sanctify you.

31:14. keep you my sabbath: for it is holy unto you: he that shall
profane it, shall be put to death: he that shall do any work in it, his
soul shall perish out of the midst of his people.

31:15. Six days shall you do work: in the seventh day is the sabbath,
the rest holy to the Lord. Every one that shall do any work on this day,
shall die.

31:16. Let the children of Israel keep the sabbath, and celebrate it in
their generations. It is an everlasting covenant.

31:17. Between me and the children of Israel, and a perpetual sign. For
in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and in the seventh he ceased
from work.

31:18. And the Lord, when he had ended these words in Mount Sinai, gave
to Moses two stone tables of testimony, written with the finger of God.

Exodus Chapter 32

The people fall into idolatry. Moses prayeth for them. He breaketh the
tables: destroyeth the idol: blameth Aaron, and causeth many of the
idolaters to be slain.

32:1. And the people seeing that Moses delayed to come down from the
mount, gathering together against Aaron, said: Arise, make us gods, that
may go before us: For as to this Moses, the man that brought us out of
the land of Egypt, we know not what has befallen him.

32:2. And Aaron said to them: Take the golden earrings from the ears of
your wives, and your sons and daughters, and bring them to me.

32:3. And the people did what he had commanded, bringing the earrings to
Aaron.

32:4. And when he had received them, he fashioned them by founders'
work, and made of them a molten calf. And they said: These are thy gods,
O Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

32:5. And when Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it, and made
proclamation by a crier's voice, saying To morrow is the solemnity of
the Lord.

32:6. And rising in the morning, they offered holocausts, and peace
victims, and the people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose up to
play.

32:7. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, get thee down: thy
people, which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, hath sinned.

32:8. They have quickly strayed from the way which thou didst shew them:
and they have made to themselves a molten calf, and have adored it, and
sacrificing victims to it, have said: These are thy gods, O Israel, that
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

32:9. And again the Lord said to Moses: I see that this people is
stiffnecked:

32:10. Let me alone, that my wrath may be kindled against them, and that
I may destroy them, and I will make of thee a great nation.

32:11. But Moses besought the Lord his God, saying: Why, O Lord, is thy
indignation enkindled against thy people, whom thou hast brought out of
the land of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand?

32:12. Let not the Egyptians say, I beseech thee: He craftily brought
them out, that he might kill them in the mountains, and destroy them
from the earth: let thy anger cease, and be appeased upon the wickedness
of thy people.

32:13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou
sworest by thy own self, saying: I will multiply your seed as the stars
of heaven: and this whole land that I have spoken of, I will give to
your seed, and you shall possess it for ever:

32:14. And the Lord was appeased from doing the evil which he had spoken
against his people.

32:15. And Moses returned from the mount, carrying the two tables of the
testimony in his hand, written on both sides,

32:16. And made by the work of God; the writing also of God was graven
in the tables.

32:17. And Josue hearing the noise of the people shouting, said to
Moses: The noise of battle is heard in the camp.

32:18. But he answered: It is not the cry of men encouraging to fight,
nor the shout of men compelling to flee: but I hear the voice of
singers.

32:19. And when he came nigh to the camp, he saw the calf, and the
dances: and being very angry, he threw the tables out of his hand, and
broke them at the foot of the mount:

32:20. And laying hold of the calf which they had made, he burnt it, and
beat it to powder, which he strewed into water, and gave thereof to the
children of Israel to drink.

32:21. And he said to Aaron: What has this people done to thee, that
thou shouldst bring upon them a most heinous sin?

32:22. And he answered him: Let not my lord be offended; for thou
knowest this people, that they are prone to evil.

32:23. They said to me: make us gods, that may go before us; for as to
this Moses, who brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, we know not
what is befallen him.

32:24. And I said to them: Which of you hath any gold? and they took and
brought it to me; and I cast it into the fire, and this calf came out.

32:25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked, (for Aaron had
stripped them by occasion of the shame of the filth, and had set them
naked among their enemies)

Naked... Having lost not only their gold, and their honour, but what was
worst of all, being stripped also of the grace of God, and having lost
him.-The shame of the filth... That is, of the idol, which they had
taken for their god. It is the usual phrase of the scripture to call
idols filth and abominations.

32:26. Then standing in the gate of the camp, he said: If any man be on
the Lord's side, let him join with me. And all the sons of Levi gathered
themselves together unto him:

32:27. And he said to them: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Put every
man his sword upon his thigh: go, and return from gate to gate through
the midst of the camp, and let every man kill his brother, and friend,
and neighbour.

32:28. And the sons of Levi did according to the words of Moses, and
there were slain that day about three and twenty thousand men.

32:29. And Moses said: You have consecrated your hands this day to the
Lord, every man in his son and in his brother, that a blessing may be
given to you.

32:30. And when the next day was come, Moses spoke to the people: You
have sinned a very great sin: I will go up to the Lord, if by any means
I may be able to entreat him for your crime.

32:31. And returning to the Lord, he said: I beseech thee: this people
hath sinned a heinous sin, and they have made to themselves gods of
gold: either forgive them this trespass,

32:32. Or if thou do not, strike me out of the book that thou hast
written.

32:33. And the Lord answered him: He that hath sinned against me, him
will I strike out of my book:

32:34. But go thou, and lead this people whither I have told thee: my
angel shall go before thee. And I in the day of revenge will visit this
sin also of theirs.

32:35. The Lord therefore struck the people for the guilt, on occasion
of the calf which Aaron had made.

Exodus Chapter 33

The people mourn for their sin. Moses pitcheth the tabernacle without
the camp. He converseth familiarly with God. Desireth to see his glory.

33:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, get thee up from this
place, thou and thy people which thou hast brought out of the land of
Egypt, into the land concerning which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, saying: To thy seed I will give it:

33:2. And I will send an angel before thee, that I may cast out the
Chanaanite, and the Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherezite, and
the Hevite, and the Jebusite,

33:3. That thou mayst enter into the land that floweth with milk and
honey. For I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stiffnecked
people; lest I destroy thee in the way.

33:4. And the people hearing these very bad tidings, mourned: and no man
put on his ornaments according to custom.

33:5. And the Lord said to Moses: Say to the children of Israel: Thou
art a stiffnecked people, once I shall come up in the midst of thee, and
shall destroy thee. Now presently lay aside thy ornaments, that I may
know what to do to thee.

33:6. So the children of Israel laid aside their ornaments by Mount
Horeb.

33:7. Moses also taking the tabernacle, pitched it without the camp afar
off, and called the name thereof, The tabernacle of the covenant. And
all the people, that had any question, went forth to the tabernacle of
the covenant, without the camp.

33:8. And when Moses went forth to the tabernacle, all the people rose
up, and every one stood in the door of his pavilion, and they beheld the
back of Moses, till he went into the tabernacle.

33:9. And when he was gone into the tabernacle of the covenant, the
pillar of the cloud came down, and stood at the door, and he spoke with
Moses.

33:10. And all saw that the pillar of the cloud stood at the door of the
tabernacle. And they stood and worshipped at the doors of their tent.

33:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man is wont to
speak to his friend. And when he returned into the camp, his servant
Josue, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not from the tabernacle.

Face to face... That is, in a most familiar manner. Though as we learn
from this very chapter, Moses could not see the face of the Lord.

33:12. And Moses said to the Lord: Thou commandest me to lead forth this
people; and thou dost not let me know whom thou wilt send with me,
especially whereas thou hast said: I know thee by name, and thou hast
found favour in my sight.

I know thee by name... In the language of the scriptures, God is said to
know such as he approves and loves: and to know by name, those whom he
favours in a most singular manner, as he did his servant Moses.

33:13. If therefore I have found favour in thy sight, shew me thy face,
that I may know thee, and may find grace before thy eyes: look upon thy
people this nation.

33:14. And the Lord said: My face shall go before thee, and I will give
thee rest.

33:15. And Moses said: If thou thyself dost not go before, bring us not
out of this place.

33:16. For how shall we be able to know, I and thy people, that we have
found grace in thy sight, unless thou walk with us, that we may be
glorified by all people that dwell upon the earth?

33:17. And the Lord said to Moses: This word also, which thou hast
spoken, will I do; for thou hast found grace before me, and thee I have
known by name.

33:18. And he said: Shew me thy glory.

33:19. He answered: I will shew thee all good, and I will proclaim in
the name of the Lord before thee: and I will have mercy on whom I will,
and I will be merciful to whom it shall please me.

33:20. And again he said: Thou canst not see my face: for man shall not
see me, and live.

33:21. And again he said: Behold there is a place with me, and thou
shalt stand upon the rock.

33:22. And when my glory shall pass, I will set thee in a hole of the
rock, and protect thee with my righthand till I pass:

33:23. And I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see my back parts:
but my face thou canst not see.

See my back parts... The Lord by his angel, usually spoke to Moses in
the pillar of the cloud; so that he could not see the glory of him that
spoke familiarly with him. In the vision here mentioned he was allowed
to see something of him, in an assumed corporeal form: not in the face,
the rays of which were too bright for mortal eye to bear, but to view
him as it were behind, when his face was turned from him.

Exodus Chapter 34

The tables are renewed: all society with the Chanaanites is forbid: some
precepts concerning the firstborn, the sabbath, and other feasts: after
forty days' fast, Moses returneth to the people with the commandments,
and his face appearing horned with rays of light, he covereth it,
whensoever he speaketh to the people.

34:1. And after this he said: Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the
former, and I will write upon them the words, which were in the tables,
which thou brokest.

34:2. Be ready in the morning, that thou mayst forthwith go up into
Mount Sinai, and thou shalt stand with me upon the top of the mount.

34:3. Let no man go up with thee, and let not any man be seen throughout
all the mount; neither let the oxen nor the sheep feed over against it.

34:4. Then he cut out two tables of stone, such as had been before; and
rising very early he went up into the Mount Sinai, as the Lord had
commanded him, carrying with him the tables.

34:5. And when the Lord was come down in a cloud, Moses stood with him,
calling upon the name of the Lord.

34:6. And when he passed before him, he said: O the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, patient and of much compassion, and true,

34:7. Who keepest mercy unto thousands: who takest away iniquity, and
wickedness, and sin, and no man of himself is innocent before thee. Who
renderest the iniquity of the fathers to the children, and to the
grandchildren unto the third and fourth generation.

34:8. And Moses making haste, bowed down prostrate unto the earth, and
adoring,

34:9. Said: If I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, I beseech thee
that thou wilt go with us, (for it is a stiffnecked people) and take
away our iniquities and sin, and possess us.

34:10. The Lord answered: I will make a covenant in the sight of all, I
will do signs such as were never seen upon the earth, nor in any
nations; that this people, in the midst of whom thou art, may see the
terrible work of the Lord which I will do.

34:11. Observe all things which this day I command thee: I myself will
drive out before thy face the Amorrhite, and the Chanaanite, and the
Hethite, and the Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite.

34:12. Beware thou never join in friendship with the inhabitants of that
land, which may be thy ruin:

34:13. But destroy their altars, break their statues and cut down their
groves:

34:14. Adore not any strange god. The Lord his name is jealous, he is a
jealous God.

34:15. Make no covenant with the men of those countries; lest, when they
have committed fornication with their gods, and have adored their idols,
some one call thee to eat of the things sacrificed.

34:16. Neither shalt thou take of their daughters a wife for thy son,
lest after they themselves have committed fornication, they make thy
sons also to commit fornication with their gods.

34:17. Thou shalt not make to thyself any molten gods.

34:18: Thou shalt keep the feast of the unleavened bread. Seven days
shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee in the time of the
month of the new corn: for in the month of the spring time thou camest
out from Egypt.

34:19. All of the male-kind that openeth the womb, shall be mine. Of all
beasts; both of oxen and of sheep, it shall be mine.

34:20. The firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a sheep: but if
thou wilt not give a price for it, it shall be slain. The firstborn of
thy sons thou shalt redeem: neither shalt thou appear before me empty.

34:21. Six days shalt thou work, the seventh day thou shalt cease to
plough and to reap.

34:22. Thou shalt keep the feast of weeks with the firstfruits of the
corn of thy wheat harvest, and the feast when the time of the year
returneth that all things are laid in.

34:23. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear in the sight
of the almighty Lord the God of Israel.

34:24. For when I shall have taken away the nations from thy face, and
shall have enlarged thy borders, no man shall lie in wait against thy
land when thou shalt go up, and appear in the sight of the Lord thy God
thrice in a year.

34:25. Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice upon leaven;
neither shall there remain in the morning any thing of the victim of the
solemnity of the Phase.

34:26. The first of the fruits of thy ground thou shalt offer in the
house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of his
dam.

34:27. And the Lord said to Moses: Write thee these words, by which I
have made a covenant both with thee and with Israel.

34:28. And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights: he
neither ate bread nor drank water, and he wrote upon the tables the ten
words of the covenant.

34:29. And when Moses came down from the Mount Sinai, he held the two
tables of the testimony, and he knew not that his face was horned from
the conversation of the Lord.

Horned... That is, shining, and sending forth rays of light like horns.

34:30. And Aaron and the children of Israel seeing the face of Moses
horned, were afraid to come near.

34:31. And being called by him, they returned, both Aaron and the rulers
of the congregation. And after that he spoke to them,

34:32. And all the children of Israel came to him: and he gave them in
commandment all that he had heard of the Lord on Mount Sinai.

34:33. And having done speaking, he put a veil upon his face.

34:34. But when he went in to the Lord, and spoke with him, he took it
away until he came forth, and then he spoke to the children of Israel
all things that had been commanded him.

34:35. And they saw that the face of Moses when he came out was horned,
but he covered his face again, if at any time he spoke to them.

Exodus Chapter 35

The sabbath. Offerings for making the tabernacle. Beseleel and Ooliab
are called to the work.

35:1. And all the multitude of the children of Israel being gathered
together, he said to them: These are the things which the Lord hath
commanded to be done:

35:2. Six days you shall do work; the seventh day shall be holy unto
you, the sabbath and the rest of the Lord: he that shall do any work on
it, shall be put to death.

35:3. You shall kindle no fire in any of your habitations on the sabbath
day.

35:4. And Moses said to all the assembly of the children of Israel: This
is the word the Lord hath commanded, saying:

35:5. Set aside with you firstfruits to the Lord. Let every one that is
willing and hath a ready heart, offer them to the Lord: gold, and
silver, and brass,

35:6. Violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, goats'
hair,

35:7. And rams' skins dyed red, and violet coloured skins, setim wood,

35:8. And oil to maintain lights, and to make ointment, and most sweet
incense,

35:9. Onyx stones, and precious stones, for the adorning of the ephod
and the rational.

35:10. Whosoever of you is wise, let him come, and make that which the
Lord hath commanded:

35:11. To wit, the tabernacle, and the roof thereof, and the cover, the
rings, and the board-work with the bars, the pillars and the sockets:

35:12. The ark and the staves, the propitiatory, and the veil that is
drawn before it:

35:13. The table with the bars and the vessels, and the loaves of
proposition:

35:14. The candlestick to bear up the lights, the vessels thereof and
the lamps, and the oil for the nourishing of fires:

35:15. The altar of incense, and the bars, and the oil of unction, and
the incense of spices: the hanging at the door of the tabernacle:

35:16. The altar of holocaust, and its grate of brass, with the bars and
vessels thereof: the laver and its foot:

35:17. The curtains of the court, with the pillars and the sockets, the
hanging in the doors of the entry.

35:18. The pins of the tabernacle, and of the court, with their little
cords:

35:19. The vestments that are to be used in the ministry of the
sanctuary, the vesture of Aaron the high priest, and of his sons, to do
the office of priesthood to me.

35:20. And all the multitude of the children of Israel going out from
the presence of Moses,

35:21. Offered firstfruits to the Lord with a most ready and devout
mind, to make the work of the tabernacle of the testimony. Whatever was
necessary to the service and to the holy vestments,

35:22. Both men and women gave bracelets and earrings, rings and
tablets: every vessel of gold was set aside to be offered to the Lord.

35:23. If any man had violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, fine
linen and goats' hair, ramskins dyed red, and violet coloured skins,

35:24. Metal of silver and brass, they offered it to the Lord, and setim
wood for divers uses.

35:25. The skilful women also gave such things as they had spun, violet,
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen,

35:26. And goats' hair, giving all of their own accord.

35:27. But the princes offered onyx stones, and precious stones, for the
ephod and the rational,

35:28. And spices and oil for the lights, and for the preparing of
ointment, and to make the incense of most sweet savour.

35:29. All, both men and women, with devout mind offered gifts, that the
works might be done which the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moses.
All the children of Israel dedicated voluntary offerings to the Lord.

35:30. And Moses said to the children of Israel: Behold, the Lord hath
called by name Beseleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of
Juda,

35:31. And hath filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom and
understanding, and knowledge, and all learning,

35:32. To devise and to work in gold and silver and brass,

35:33. And in engraving stones, and in carpenters' work. Whatsoever can
be devised artificially,

35:34. He hath given in his heart: Ooliab also, the son of Achisamech,
of the tribe of Dan:

35:35. Both of them hath he instructed with wisdom, to do carpenters'
work, and tapestry, and embroidery in blue and purple, and scarlet twice
dyed, and fine linen, and to weave all things, and to invent all new
things.

Exodus Chapter 36

The offerings are delivered to the workmen, the curtains, coverings,
boards, bars, veil, pillars, and hanging are made.

36:1. Beseleel therefore, and Ooliab, and every wise man, to whom the
Lord gave wisdom and understanding, to know how to work artificially,
made the things that are necessary for the uses of the sanctuary, and
which the Lord commanded.

36:2. And when Moses had called them, and every skilful man, to whom the
Lord had given wisdom, and such as of their own accord had offered
themselves to the making of the work,

36:3. He delivered all the offerings of the children of Israel unto
them. And while they were earnest about the work, the people daily in
the morning offered their vows.

36:4. Whereupon the workmen being constrained to come,

36:5. Said to Moses: The people offereth more than is necessary.

36:6. Moses therefore commanded proclamation to be made by the crier's
voice: Let neither man nor woman offer any more for the work of the
sanctuary. And so they ceased from offering gifts,

36:7. Because the things that were offered did suffice, and were too
much.

36:8. And all the men that were wise of heart, to accomplish the work of
the tabernacle, made ten curtains of twisted fine linen, and violet, and
purple, and scarlet twice dyed, with varied work, and the art of
embroidering:

36:9. The length of one curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth
four: all the curtains were of the same size.

36:10. And he joined five curtains, one to another, and the other five
he coupled one to another.

36:11. He made also loops of violet in the edge of one curtain on both
sides, and in the edge of the other curtain in like manner,

36:12. That the loops might meet one against another, and might be
joined each with the other.

36:13. Whereupon also he cast fifty rings of gold, that might catch the
loops of the curtains, and they might be made one tabernacle.

36:14. He made also eleven curtains of goats' hair, to cover the roof of
the tabernacle:

36:15. One curtain was thirty cubits long, and four cubits broad: all
the curtains were of one measure.

36:16. Five of which he joined apart, and the other six apart.

36:17. And he made fifty loops in the edge of one curtain, and fifty in
the edge of another curtain, that they might be joined one to another.

36:18. And fifty buckles of brass wherewith the roof might be knit
together, that of all the curtains there might be made one covering.

36:19. He made also a cover for the tabernacle of rams' skins dyed red;
and another cover over that of violet skins.

36:20. He made also the boards of the tabernacle of setim wood standing.

36:21. The length of one board was ten cubits; and the breadth was one
cubit and a half.

36:22. There were two mortises throughout every board, that one might be
joined to the other. And in this manner he made for all the boards of
the tabernacle.

36:23. Of which twenty were at the south side southward,

36:24. With forty sockets of silver, two sockets were put under one
board on the two sides of the corners, where the mortises of the sides
end in the corners.

36:25. At that side also of the tabernacle, that looketh towards the
north, he made twenty boards,

36:26. With forty sockets of silver, two sockets for every board.

36:27. But against the west, to wit, at that side of the tabernacle,
which looketh to the sea, he made six boards,

36:28. And two others at each corner of the tabernacle behind:

36:29. Which were also joined from beneath unto the top, and went
together into one joint. Thus he did on both sides at the corners:

36:30. So there were in all eight boards, and they had sixteen sockets
of silver, to wit, two sockets under every board.

36:31. He made also bars of setim wood, five to hold together the boards
of one side of the tabernacle,

36:32. And five others to join together the boards of the other side;
and besides these, five other bars at the west side of the tabernacle
towards the sea.

36:33. He made also another bar, that might come by the midst of the
boards from corner to corner.

36:34. And the boards themselves he overlaid with gold casting for them
sockets of silver. And their rings he made of gold, through which the
bars might be drawn: and he covered the bars themselves with plates of
gold.

36:35. He made also a veil of violet, and purple, scarlet and fine
twisted linen, varied and distinguished with embroidery:

36:36. And four pillars of setim wood, which with their heads he
overlaid with gold, casting for them sockets of silver.

36:37. He made also a hanging in the entry of the tabernacle of violet,
purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, with the work of an
embroiderer.

36:38. And five pillars with their heads, which he covered with gold,
and their sockets he cast of brass.

Exodus Chapter 37

Beseleel maketh the ark: the propitiatory, and cherubims, the table, the
candlestick, the lamps, and the altar of incense, and compoundeth the
incense.

37:1. And Beseleel made also, the ark of setim wood: it was two cubits
and a half in length, and a cubit and a half in breadth, and the height
was of one cubit and a half: and he overlaid it with the purest gold
within and without.

37:2. And he made to it a crown of gold round about,

37:3. Casting four rings of gold at the four corners thereof: two rings
in one side, and two in the other.

37:4. And he made bars of setim wood, which he overlaid with gold,

37:5. And he put them into the rings that were at the sides of the ark
to carry it.

37:6. He made also the propitiatory, that is, the oracle, of the purest
gold, two cubits and a half in length, and a cubit and a half in
breadth.

37:7. Two cherubims also of beaten gold, which he set on the two sides
of the propitiatory:

37:8. One cherub in the top of one side, and the other cherub in the top
of the other side: two cherubims at the two ends of the propitiatory,

37:9. Spreading their wings, and covering the propitiatory, and looking
one towards the other, and towards it.

37:10. He made also the table of setim wood, in length two cubits, and
in breadth one cubit, and in height it was a cubit and a half.

37:11. And he overlaid it with the finest gold, and he made to it a
golden ledge round about,

37:12. And to the ledge itself he made a polished crown of gold, of four
fingers breadth, and upon the same another golden crown.

37:13. And he cast four rings of gold, which he put in the four corners
at each foot of the table,

37:14. Over against the crown: and he put the bars into them, that the
table might be carried.

37:15. The bars also themselves he made of setim wood, and overlaid them
with gold.

37:16. And the vessels for the divers uses of the table, dishes, bowls,
and cups, and censers of pure gold, wherein the libations are to be
offered.

37:17. He made also the candlestick of beaten work of the finest gold.
from the shaft whereof its branches, its cups, and bowls, and lilies
came out:

37:18: Six on the two sides: three branches on one side, and three on
the other.

37:19. Three cups in manner of a nut on each branch, and bowls withal
and lilies: and three cups of the fashion of a nut in another branch,
and bowls withal and lilies. The work of the six branches, that went out
from the shaft of the candlestick was equal.

37:20. And in the shaft itself were four cups after the manner of a nut,
and bowls withal at every one, and lilies:

37:21. And bowls under two branches in three places, which together made
six branches going out from one shaft.

37:22. So both the bowls, and the branches were of the same, all beaten
work of the purest gold.

37:23. He made also the seven lamps with their snuffers, and the vessels
where the snuffings were to be put out, of the purest gold.

37:24. The candlestick with all the vessels thereof weighed a talent of
gold.

37:25. He made also the alter of incense of setim wood, being a cubit on
every side foursquare, and in height two cubits: from the corners of
which went out horns.

37:26. And he overlaid it with the purest gold, with its grate, and the
sides, and the horns.

37:27. And he made to it a crown of gold round about, and two golden
rings under the crown at each side, that the bars might be put into
them, and the altar be carried.

37:28. And the bars themselves he made also of setim wood, and overlaid
them with plates of gold.

37:29. He compounded also the oil for the ointment of sanctification,
and incense of the purest spices, according to the work of a perfumer.

Exodus Chapter 38

He maketh the altar of holocaust. The brazen laver. The court with its
pillars and hangings. The sum of what the people offered.

38:1. He made also the altar of holocaust of setim wood, five cubits
square, and three in height:

38:2. The horns whereof went out from the corners, and he overlaid it
with plates of brass.

38:3. And for the uses thereof, he prepared divers vessels of brass,
cauldrons, tongs, fleshhooks, pothooks and firepans.

38:4. And he made the grate thereof of brass, in manner of a net, and
under it in the midst of the altar a hearth,

38:5. Casting four rings at the four ends of the net at the top, to put
in bars to carry it:

38:6. And he made the bars of setim wood, and overlaid them with plates
of brass:

38:7. And he drew them through the rings that stood out in the sides of
the altar. And the altar itself was not solid, but hollow, of boards,
and empty within.

38:8. He made also the laver of brass, with the foot thereof, of the
mirrors of the women that watched at the door of the tabernacle.

38:9. He made also the court, in the south side whereof were hangings of
fine twisted linen of a hundred cubits.

38:10. Twenty pillars of brass with their sockets, the beads of the
pillars, and the whole graving of the work, of silver.

38:11. In like manner at the north side the hangings, the pillars, and
the sockets and heads of the pillars were of the same measure, and work
and metal.

38:12. But on that side that looketh to the west, there were hangings of
fifty cubits, ten pillars of brass with their sockets, and the heads of
the pillars, and all the graving of the work, of silver.

38:13. Moreover, towards the east he prepared hangings of fifty cubits:

38:14. Fifteen cubits of which, were on one side with three pillars, and
their sockets:

38:15. And on the other side (for between the two he made the entry of
the tabernacle) there were hangings equally of fifteen cubits, and three
pillars, and as many sockets.

38:16. All the hangings of the court were woven with twisted linen.

38:17. The sockets of the pillars were of brass, and their heads with
all their gravings of silver: and he overlaid the pillars of the court
also with silver.

38:18. And he made in the entry thereof an embroidered hanging of
violet, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, that was twenty cubits
long, and five cubits high, according to the measure of all the hangings
of the court.

38:19. And the pillars in the entry were four, with sockets of brass,
and their heads and gravings of silver.

38:20. The pins also of the tabernacle and of the court round about he
made of brass.

38:21. These are the instruments of the tabernacle of the testimony,
which were counted according to the commandment of Moses, in the
ceremonies of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son of Aaron the
priest:

38:22. Which Beseleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur of the tribe of
Juda, had made, as the Lord commanded by Moses.

38:23. Having for his companion Ooliab, the son of Achisamech, of the
tribe of Dan: who also was an excellent artificer in wood, and worker
in tapestry and embroidery in violet, purple, scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24. All the gold that was spent in the work of the sanctuary, and
that was offered in gifts, was nine and twenty talents, and seven
hundred and thirty sicles according to the standard of the sanctuary.

38:25. And it was offered by them that went to be numbered, from twenty
years old and upwards, of six hundred and three thousand five hundred
and fifty men able to bear arms.

38:26. There were moreover a hundred talents of silver, whereof were
cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and of the entry where the veil
hangeth.

38:27. A hundred sockets were made of a hundred talents, one talent
being reckoned for every socket.

38:28. And of the thousand seven hundred and seventy-five he made the
heads of the pillars, which also he overlaid with silver.

38:29. And there were offered of brass also seventy-two thousand
talents, and four hundred sicles besides,

38:30. Of which were cast the sockets in the entry of the tabernacle of
the testimony, and the altar of brass with the grate thereof, and also
the vessels that belong to the use thereof.

38:31. And the sockets of the court as well round about as in the entry
thereof, and the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about.

Exodus Chapter 39

All the ornaments of Aaron and his sons are made. And the whole work of
the tabernacle is finished.

39:1. And he made, of violet and purple, scarlet and fine linen, the
vestments for Aaron to wear when he ministered in the holy places, as
the Lord commanded Moses.

39:2. So he made an ephod of gold, violet, and purple, and scarlet twice
dyed, and fine twisted linen,

39:3. With embroidered work, and he cut thin plates of gold, and drew
them small into threads, that they might be twisted with the woof of the
foresaid colours,

39:4. And two borders coupled one to the other in the top on either
side,

39:5. And a girdle of the same colours, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

39:6. He prepared also two onyx stones, fast set and closed in gold, and
graven, by the art of a lapidary, with the names of the children of
Israel:

39:7. And he set them in the sides of the ephod, for a memorial of the
children of Israel, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

39:8. He made also a rational with embroidered work, according to the
work of the ephod, of gold, violet, purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and
fine twisted linen:

39:9. Foursquare, double, of the measure of a span.

39:10. And he set four rows of precious stones in it. In the first row
was a sardius, a topaz, an emerald.

39:11. In the second, a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a jasper.

39:12. In the third, a ligurius, an agate, and an amethyst.

39:13. In the fourth, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a beryl, set and
enclosed in gold by their rows.

39:14. And the twelve stones, were engraved with the names of the twelve
tribes of Israel, each one with its several name.

39:15. They made also in the rational little chains, linked one to
another, of the purest gold,

39:16. And two hooks, and as many rings of gold. And they set the rings
on either side of the rational,

39:17. On which rings the two golden chains should hang, which they put
into the hooks that stood out in the corners of the ephod.

39:18. These both before and behind so answered one another, that the
ephod and the rational were bound together,

39:19. Being fastened to the girdle, and strongly coupled with rings,
which a violet fillet joined, lest they should flag loose, and be moved
one from the other, as the Lord commanded Moses.

39:20. They made also the tunic of the ephod all of violet,

39:21. And a hole for the head in the upper part at the middle, and a
woven border round about the hole:

39:22. And beneath at the feet pomegranates of violet, purple, scarlet,
and fine twisted linen:

39:23. And little bells of the purest gold, which they put between the
pomegranates at the bottom of the tunic round about:

39:24. To wit, a bell of gold, and a pomegranate, wherewith the high
priest went adorned, when he discharged his ministry, as the Lord had
commanded Moses.

39:25. They made also fine linen tunics with woven work for Aaron and
his sons:

39:26. And mitres with their little crowns of fine linen:

39:27. And linen breeches of fine linen:

39:28. And a girdle of fine twisted linen, violet, purple, and scarlet
twice dyed, of embroidery work, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

39:29. They made also the plate of sacred veneration of the purest gold,
and they wrote on it with the engraving of a lapidary: The Holy of the
Lord:

39:30. And they fastened it to the mitre with a violet fillet, as the
Lord had commanded Moses.

39:31. So all the work of the tabernacle and of the roof of the
testimony was finished: and the children of Israel did all things which
the Lord had commanded Moses.

39:32. And they offered the tabernacle, and the roof, and the whole
furniture, the rings, the boards, the bars, the pillars and their
sockets,

39:33. The cover of rams' skins dyed red, and the other cover of violet
skins,

39:34. The veil, the ark, the bars, the propitiatory,

39:35. The table, with the vessels thereof, and the loaves of
proposition:

39:36. The candlestick, the lamps, and the furniture of them, with the
oil:

39:37. The altar of gold, and the ointment, and the incense of spices:

39:38. And the hanging in the entry of the tabernacle:

39:39. The altar of brass, the grate, the bars, and all the vessels
thereof: the laver, with the foot thereof: the hangings of the court,
and the pillars, with their sockets:

39:40. The hanging in the entry of the court, and the little cords, and
the pins thereof. Nothing was wanting of the vessels, that were
commanded to be made for the ministry of the tabernacle, and for the
roof of the covenant.

39:41. The vestments also, which the priests, to wit, Aaron and his
sons, use in the sanctuary,

39:42. The children of Israel offered, as the Lord had commanded.

39:43. And when Moses saw all things finished, he blessed them.

Exodus Chapter 40

The tabernacle is commanded to be set up and anointed. God filleth it
with his majesty.

40:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

40:2. The first month, the first day of the month, thou shalt set up the
tabernacle of the testimony,

40:3. And shalt put the ark in it, and shalt let down the veil before
it:

40:4. And thou shalt bring in the table, and set upon it the things that
are commanded according to the rite. The candlestick shall stand with
its lamps,

40:5. And the altar of gold, whereon the incense is burnt before the ark
of the testimony. Thou shalt put the hanging in the entry of the
tabernacle,

40:6. And before it the altar of holocaust.

40:7. The laver between the altar and the tabernacle, and thou shalt
fill it with water.

40:8. And thou shalt encompass the court with hangings, and the entry
thereof.

40:9. And thou shalt take the oil of unction and anoint the tabernacle
with its vessels, that they may be sanctified:

40:10. The altar of holocaust and all its vessels:

40:11. The laver with its foot: thou shalt consecrate all with the oil
of unction, that they may be most holy.

40:12. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the
tabernacle of the testimony, and having washed them with water,

40:13. Thou shalt put on them the holy vestments, that they may minister
to me, and that the unction of them may prosper to an everlasting
priesthood.

40:14. And Moses did all that the Lord had commanded.

40:15. So in the first month of the second year, the first day of the
month, the tabernacle was set up.

40:16. And Moses reared it up, and placed the boards and the sockets and
the bars, and set up the pillars,

40:17. And spread the roof over the tabernacle, putting over it a cover,
as the Lord had commanded.

40:18. And he put the testimony in the ark, thrusting bars underneath,
and the oracle above.

40:19. And when he had brought the ark into the tabernacle, he drew the
veil before it to fulfil the commandment of the Lord.

40:20. And he set the table in the tabernacle of the testimony, at the
north side, without the veil,

40:21. Setting there in order the loaves of proposition, as the Lord had
commanded Moses.

40:22. He set the candlestick also in the tabernacle of the testimony,
over against the table on the south side,

40:23. Placing the lamps in order, according to the precept of the Lord.

40:24. He set also the altar of gold under the roof of the testimony,
over against the veil,

40:25. And burnt upon it the incense of spices, as the Lord had
commanded Moses.

40:26. And he put also the hanging in the entry of the tabernacle of the
testimony,

40:27. And the altar of holocaust in the entry of the testimony,
offering the holocaust, and the sacrifices upon it, as the Lord had
commanded.

40:28. And he set the laver between the tabernacle of the testimony and
the altar, filling it with water.

40:29. And Moses and Aaron, and his sons, washed their hands and feet,

40:30. When they went into the tabernacle of the covenant, and went to
the altar, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

40:31. He set up also the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar, drawing the hanging in the entry thereof. After all things were
perfected,

40:32. The cloud covered the tabernacle of the testimony, and the glory
of the Lord filled it.

40:33. Neither could Moses go into the tabernacle of the covenant, the
cloud covering all things, and the majesty of the Lord shining, for the
cloud had covered all.

40:34. If at any time the cloud removed from the tabernacle, the
children of Israel went forward by their troops:

40:35. If it hung over, they remained in the same place.

40:36. For the cloud of the Lord hung over the tabernacle by day, and a
fire by night, in the sight of all the children of Israel throughout all
their mansions.








THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS

This Book is called LEVITICUS, because it treats of the Offices,
Ministries, Rites and Ceremonies of the Priests and Levites. The Hebrews
call it VAICRA, from the word with which it begins.


Leviticus Chapter 1

Of holocausts or burnt offerings.

1:1. And the Lord called Moses, and spoke to him from the tabernacle of
the testimony, saying:

1:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: The
man among you that shall offer to the Lord a sacrifice of the cattle,
that is, offering victims of oxen and sheep:

1:3. If his offering be a holocaust, and of the herd, he shall offer a
male without blemish, at the door of the testimony, to make the Lord
favourable to him.

A holocaust... That is, a whole burnt offering (olokauston), so called,
because the whole victim was consumed with fire; and given in such
manner to God as wholly to evaporate, as it were, for his honour and
glory; without having any part of it reserved for the use of man. The
other sacrifices in the Old Testament were either offerings for sin, or
peace offerings: and these latter again were either offered in
thanksgiving for blessings received; or by way of prayer for new favours
or graces. So that sacrifices were then offered to God for four
different ends or intentions, answerable to the different obligations
which man has to God: 1. By way of adoration, homage, praise, and glory
due to his divine majesty. 2. By way of thanksgiving for all benefits
received from him. 3. By way of confessing and craving pardon for sins.
4. By way of prayer and petition for grace and relief in all
necessities. In the New Law we have but one sacrifice, viz., that of the
body and blood of Christ: but this one sacrifice of the New Testament
perfectly answers all these four ends; and both priest and people, as
often as it is celebrated, ought to join in offering it up for these
four ends.

1:4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the victim: and it shall
be acceptable, and help to its expiation.

1:5. And he shall immolate the calf before the Lord: and the priests the
sons of Aaron shall offer the blood thereof, pouring it round about the
altar, which is before the door of the tabernacle.

1:6. And when they have flayed the victim, they shall cut the joints
into pieces:

1:7. And shall put fire on the altar, having before laid in order a pile
of wood.

1:8. And they shall lay the parts that are cut out in order thereupon:
to wit, the head, and all things that cleave to the liver;

1:9. The entrails and feet being washed with water. And the priest shall
burn them upon the altar for a holocaust, and a sweet savour to the
Lord.

1:10. And if the offering be of the flocks, a holocaust of sheep or of
goats, he shall offer a male without blemish.

1:11. And he shall immolate it at the side of the altar that looketh to
the north, before the Lord: but the sons of Aaron shall pour the blood
thereof upon the altar round about.

1:12. And they shall divide the joints, the head, and all that cleave to
the liver: and shall lay them upon the wood, under which the fire is to
be put.

1:13. But the entrails and the feet they shall wash with water. And the
priest shall offer it all and burn it all upon the altar for a
holocaust, and most sweet savour to the Lord.

1:14. But if the oblation of a holocaust to the Lord be of birds, of
turtles, or of young pigeons:

1:15. The priest shall offer it at the altar: and twisting back the
neck, and breaking the place of the wound, he shall make the blood run
down upon the brim of the altar.

1:16. But the crop of the throat, and the feathers he shall cast beside
the altar at the east side, in the place where the ashes are wont to be
poured out.

1:17. And he shall break the pinions thereof, and shall not cut, nor
divide it with a knife: and shall burn it upon the altar, putting fire
under the wood. It is a holocaust and oblation of most sweet savour to
the Lord.

Leviticus Chapter 2

Of offerings of flour, and firstfruits.

2:1. When any one shall offer an oblation of sacrifice to the Lord, his
offering shall be of fine flour: and he shall pour oil upon it, and put
frankincense,

2:2. And shall bring it to the sons of Aaron the priests. And one of
them shall take a handful of the flour and oil, and all the
frankincense; and shall put it a memorial upon the altar for a most
sweet savour to the Lord.

2:3. And the remnant of the sacrifice shall be Aaron's, and his sons',
holy of holies of the offerings of the Lord.

Holy of holies... That is, most holy, as being dedicated to God, and set
aside by his ordinance for the use of his priests.

2:4. But when thou offerest a sacrifice baked in the oven of flour, to
wit, loaves without leaven, tempered with oil, and unleavened wafers,
anointed with oil:

2:5. If thy oblation be from the fryingpan, of flour tempered with oil,
and without leaven: 2:6. Thou shalt divide it into little pieces, and
shalt pour oil upon it.

2:7. And if the sacrifice be from the gridiron, in like manner the flour
shall be tempered with oil.

2:8. And when thou offerest it to the Lord, thou shalt deliver it to the
hands of the priest.

2:9. And when he hath offered it, he shall take a memorial out of the
sacrifice, and burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour to the Lord.

2:10. And whatsoever is left, shall be Aaron's, and his sons': holy of
holies of the offerings of the Lord.

2:11. Every oblation that is offered to the Lord shall be made without
leaven: neither shall any leaven or honey be burnt in the sacrifice to
the Lord.

Without leaven or honey... No leaven nor honey was to be used in the
sacrifice offered to God; to signify that we are to exclude from the
pure worship of the gospel, all double dealing and affection to carnal
pleasures.

2:12. You shall offer only the firstfruits of them and gifts: but they
shall not be put upon the altar, for a savour of sweetness.

2:13. Whatsoever sacrifice thou offerest, thou shalt season it with
salt: neither shalt thou take away the salt of the covenant of thy God
from thy sacrifice. In all thy oblations thou shalt offer salt.

Salt... In every sacrifice salt was to be used, which is an emblem of
wisdom and discretion, without which none of our performances are
agreeable to God.

2:14. But if thou offer a gift of the firstfruits of thy corn to the
Lord, of the ears yet green, thou shalt dry it at the fire, and break it
small like meal; and so shalt thou offer thy firstfruits to the Lord:

2:15. Pouring oil upon it and putting on frankincense, because it is the
oblation of the Lord.

2:16. Whereof the priest shall burn for a memorial of the gift, part of
the corn broken small and of the oil, and all the frankincense.

Leviticus Chapter 3

Of peace offerings.

3:1. And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offerings, and he will
offer of the herd, whether male or female: he shall offer them without
blemish before the Lord.

Peace offerings... Peace, in the scripture language, signifies
happiness, welfare or prosperity; in a word, all kind of blessings.-Such
sacrifices, therefore, as were offered either on occasion of blessings
received, or to obtain new favours, were called pacific or peace
offerings. In these, some part of the victim was consumed with fire on
the altar of God; other parts were eaten by the priests and by the
persons for whom the sacrifice was offered.

3:2. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his victim, which shall
be slain in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony: and the sons
of Aaron the priests shall pour the blood round about upon the altar.

3:3. And they shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings, for an
oblation to the Lord: the fat that covereth the entrails, and all the
fat that is within,

3:4. The two kidneys with the fat wherewith the flanks are covered, and
the caul of the liver with the two little kidneys.

3:5. And they shall burn them upon the altar, for a holocaust, putting
fire under the wood: for an oblation of most sweet savour to the Lord.

3:6. But if his oblation and the sacrifice of peace offering be of the
flock, whether he offer male or female, they shall be without blemish.

3:7. If he offer a lamb before the Lord:

3:8. He shall put his hand upon the head of the victim. And it shall be
slain in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony: and the sons of
Aaron shall pour the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:9. And they shall offer of the victim of peace offerings, a sacrifice
to the Lord: the fat and the whole rump,

3:10. With the kidneys, and the fat that covereth the belly and all the
vitals and both the little kidneys, with the fat that is about the
flanks, and the caul of the liver with the little kidneys.

3:11. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar, for the food of the
fire, and of the oblation of the Lord.

3:12. If his offering be a goat, and he offer it to the Lord:

3:13. He shall put his hand upon the head thereof: and shall immolate it
in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony. And the sons of Aaron
shall pour the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:14. And they shall take of it for the food of the Lord's fire, the fat
that covereth the belly, and that covereth all the vital parts:

3:15. The two little kidneys with the caul that is upon them which is by
the flanks, and the fat of the liver with the little kidneys.

3:16. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar, for the food of the
fire, and of a most sweet savour. All the fat shall be the Lord's.

3:17. By a perpetual law for your generations, and in all your
habitations: neither blood nor fat shall you eat at all.

Fat... It is meant of the fat, which by the prescription of the law was
to be offered on God's altar; not of the fat of meat, such as we
commonly eat.

Leviticus Chapter 4

Of offerings for sins of ignorance.

4:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

4:2. Say to the children of Israel: The soul that sinneth through
ignorance, and doth any thing concerning any of the commandments of the
Lord, which he commanded not to be done:

Ignorance... To be ignorant of what we are bound to know is sinful; and
for such culpable ignorance, these sacrifices, prescribed in this and
the following chapter, were appointed.

4:3. If the priest that is anointed shall sin, making the people to
offend, he shall offer to the Lord for his sin a calf without blemish.

4:4. And he shall bring it to the door of the testimony before the Lord:
and shall put his hand upon the head thereof, and shall sacrifice it to
the Lord.

4:5. He shall take also of the blood of the calf: and carry it into the
tabernacle of the testimony.

The blood... As the figure of the blood of Christ shed for the remission
of our sins, and carried by him into the sanctuary of heaven.

4:6. And having dipped his finger in the blood, he shall sprinkle with
it seven times before the Lord, before the veil of the sanctuary.

4:7. And he shall put some of the same blood upon the horns of the altar
of the sweet incense most acceptable to the Lord, which is in the
tabernacle of the testimony. And he shall pour all the rest of the blood
at the foot of the altar of holocaust in the entry of the tabernacle.

4:8. And he shall take off the fat of the calf for the sin offering, as
well that which covereth the entrails, as all the inwards:

4:9. The two little kidneys, and the caul that is upon them, which is by
the flanks, and the fat of the liver with the little kidneys:

4:10. As it is taken off from the calf of the sacrifice of peace
offerings. And he shall burn them upon the altar of holocaust.

4:11. But the skin and all the flesh with the head and the feet and the
bowels and the dung:

4:12. And the rest of the body, he shall carry forth without the camp
into a clean place where the ashes are wont to be poured out: and he
shall burn them upon a pile of wood. They shall be burnt in the place
where the ashes are poured out.

4:13. And if all the multitude of Israel shall be ignorant, and through
ignorance shall do that which is against the commandment of the Lord,

4:14. And afterwards shall understand their sin: they shall offer for
their sin a calf, and shall bring it to the door of the tabernacle.

4:15. And the ancients of the people shall put their hands upon the head
thereof before the Lord. And the calf being immolated in the sight of
the Lord:

4:16. The priest that is anointed shall carry of the blood into the
tabernacle of the testimony.

4:17. And shall dip his finger in it and sprinkle it seven times before
the veil.

4:18. And he shall put of the same blood on the horns of the altar that
is before the Lord, in the tabernacle of the testimony. And the rest of
the blood he shall pour at the foot of the altar of holocaust, which is
at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

4:19. And all the fat thereof he shall take off, and shall burn it upon
the altar:

4:20. Doing so with this calf, as he did also with that before. And the
priest praying for them, the Lord will be merciful unto them.

4:21. But the calf itself he shall carry forth without the camp, and
shall burn it as he did the former calf: because it is for the sin of
the multitude.

4:22. If a prince shall sin, and through ignorance do any one of the
things that the law of the Lord forbiddeth,

4:23. And afterwards shall come to know his sin: he shall offer a buck
goat without blemish, a sacrifice to the Lord.

4:24. And he shall put his hand upon the head thereof: and when he hath
immolated it in the place where the holocaust is wont to be slain before
the Lord, because it is for sin,

4:25. The priest shall dip his finger in the blood of the victim for
sin, touching therewith the horns of the altar of holocaust, and pouring
out the rest at the foot thereof.

4:26. But the fat he shall burn upon it, as is wont to be done with the
victims of peace offerings. And the priest shall pray for him, and for
his sin: and it shall be forgiven him.

4:27. And if any one of the people of the land shall sin through
ignorance, doing any of those things that by the law of the Lord are
forbidden, and offending,

4:28. And shall come to know his sin: he shall offer a she-goat without
blemish.

4:29. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the victim that is for
sin: and shall immolate it in the place of the holocaust.

4:30. And the priest shall take of the blood with his finger, and shall
touch the horns of the altar of holocaust: and shall pour out the rest
at the foot thereof.

4:31. But taking off all the fat, as is wont to be taken away of the
victims of peace offerings, he shall burn it upon the altar, for a sweet
savour to the Lord: and he shall pray for him, and it shall be forgiven
him.

4:32. But if he offer of the flock a victim for his sin, to wit, an ewe
without blemish:

4:33. He shall put his hand upon the head thereof, and shall immolate it
in the place where the victims of holocausts are wont to be slain.

4:34. And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger,
and shall touch the horns of the altar of holocaust: and the rest he
shall pour out at the foot thereof.

4:35. All the fat also he shall take off, as the fat of the ram that is
offered for peace offerings is wont to be taken away: and shall burn it
upon the altar, for a burnt sacrifice of the Lord. And he shall pray for
him and his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

Leviticus Chapter 5

Of other sacrifices for sins.

5:1. If any one sin, and hear the voice of one swearing, and is a
witness either because he himself hath seen, or is privy to it: if he do
not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity.

5:2. Whosoever toucheth any unclean thing, either that which hath been
killed by a beast, or died of itself, or any other creeping thing: and
forgetteth his uncleanness, he is guilty, and hath offended.

5:3. And if he touch any thing of the uncleanness of man, according to
any uncleanness wherewith he is wont to be defiled: and having forgotten
it, come afterwards to know it, he shall be guilty of an offence.

5:4. The person that sweareth, and uttereth with his lips, that he would
do either evil or good, and bindeth the same with an oath, and his word:
and having forgotten it afterwards understandeth his offence,

5:5. Let him do penance for his sin:

5:6. And offer of the flocks an ewe lamb, or a she-goat, and the priest
shall pray for him and for his sin.

5:7. But if he be not able to offer a beast, let him offer two turtles,
or two young pigeons to the Lord, one for sin, and the other for a
holocaust,

5:8. And he shall give them to the priest: who shall offer the first for
sin, and twist back the head of it to the little pinions, so that it
stick to the neck, and be not altogether broken off.

5:9. And of its blood he shall sprinkle the side of the altar: and
whatever is left, he shall let it drop at the bottom thereof, because it
is for sin.

5:10. And the other he shall burn for a holocaust, as is wont to be
done. And the priest shall pray for him, and for his sin, and it shall
be forgiven him.

5:11. And if his hand be not able to offer two turtles, or two young
pigeons, he shall offer for his sin the tenth part of an ephi of flour.
He shall not put oil upon it, nor put any frankincense thereon, because
it is for sin.

5:12. And he shall deliver it to the priest, who shall take a handful
thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar for a memorial of him that
offered it:

5:13. Praying for him and making atonement. But the part that is left,
he himself shall have for a gift.

5:14. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

5:15. If any one shall sin through mistake, transgressing the ceremonies
in those things that are sacrificed to the Lord, he shall offer for his
offence a ram without blemish out of the flocks, that may be bought for
two sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary.

5:16. And he shall make good the damage itself which he hath done, and
shall add the fifth part besides, delivering it to the priest, who shall
pray for him, offering the ram: and it shall be forgiven him.

5:17. If any one sin through ignorance, and do one of those things which
by the law of the Lord are forbidden, and being guilty of sin,
understand his iniquity:

5:18. He shall offer of the flocks a ram without blemish to the priest,
according to the measure and estimation of the sin. And the priest shall
pray for him, because he did it ignorantly: And it shall be forgiven
him,

5:19. Because by mistake he trespassed against the Lord.

Leviticus Chapter 6

Oblation for sins of injustice: ordinances concerning the holocausts and
the perpetual fire: the sacrifices of the priests, and the sin
offerings.

6:1. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:2. Whosoever shall sin, and despising the Lord, shall deny to his
neighbour the thing delivered to his keeping, which was committed to his
trust; or shall by force extort any thing, or commit oppression;

6:3. Or shall find a thing lost, and denying it, shall also swear
falsely, or shall do any other of the many things, wherein men are wont
to sin:

6:4. Being convicted of the offence, he shall restore

6:5. All that he would have gotten by fraud, in the principal, and the
fifth part besides, to the owner, whom he wronged.

6:6. Moreover for his sin he shall offer a ram without blemish out of
the flock: and shall give it to the priest, according to the estimation
and measure of the offence.

6:7. And he shall pray for him before the Lord: and he shall have
forgiveness for every thing in doing of which he bath sinned.

6:8. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:9. Command Aaron and his sons: This is the law of a holocaust. It
shall be burnt upon the altar, all night until morning: the fire shall
be of the same altar.

6:10. The priest shall be vested with the tunick and the linen breeches;
and he shall take up the ashes of that which the devouring fire hath
burnt: and putting them beside the altar,

6:11. Shall put off his former vestments, and being clothed with others,
shall carry them forth without the camp, and shall cause them to be
consumed to dust in a very clean place.

6:12. And the fire on the altar shall always burn, and the priest shall
feed it, putting wood on it every day in the morning: and laying on the
holocaust, shall burn thereupon the fat of the peace offerings.

6:13. This is the perpetual fire which shall never go out on the altar.

The perpetual fire... This fire came from heaven, (infra. chap. 9.24,)
and was always kept burning on the altar, as a figure of the heavenly
fire of divine love, which ought to be always burning in the heart of a
Christian.

6:14. This is the law of the sacrifice and libations, which the children
of Aaron shall offer before the Lord, and before the altar.

6:15. The priest shall take a handful of the flour that is tempered with
oil, and all the frankincense that is put upon the flour: and he shall
burn on the altar for a memorial of most sweet odour to the Lord.

6:16. And the part of the flour that is left, Aaron and his sons shall
eat, without leaven: and he shall eat it in the holy place of the court
of the tabernacle.

6:17. And therefore it shall not be leavened, because part thereof is
offered for the burnt sacrifice of the Lord. It shall be most holy, as
that which is offered for sin and for trespass.

6:18. The males only of the race of Aaron shall eat it. It shall be an
ordinance everlasting in your generations concerning the sacrifices of
the Lord: Every one that toucheth them shall be sanctified.

6:19. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:20. This is the oblation of Aaron, and of his sons, which they must
offer to the Lord, in the day of their anointing. They shall offer the
tenth part of an ephi of flour for a perpetual sacrifice, half of it in
the morning, and half of it in the evening.

6:21. It shall be tempered with oil, and shall be fried in a fryingpan.

6:22. And the priest that rightfully succeedeth his father, shall offer
it hot, for a most sweet odour to the Lord: and it shall he wholly burnt
on the altar.

6:23. For every sacrifice of the priest shall be consumed with fire:
neither shall any man eat thereof.

6:24. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:25. Say to Aaron and his sons: This is the law of the victim for sin.
In the place where the holocaust is offered, it shall be immolated
before the Lord. It is holy of holies.

6:26. The priest that offereth it, shall eat it in a holy place, in the
court of the tabernacle.

6:27. Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof, shall be sanctified. If
a garment be sprinkled with the blood thereof, it shall be washed in a
holy place.

6:28. And the earthen vessel, wherein it was sodden, shall be broken:
but if the vessel be of brass, it shall be scoured, and washed with
water.

6:29. Every male of the priestly race shall eat of the flesh thereof,
because it is holy of holies.

6:30. For the victim that is slain for sin, the blood of which is
carried into the tabernacle of the testimony to make atonement in the
sanctuary, shall not be eaten, but shall be burnt with fire.

Leviticus Chapter 7

Of sacrifices for trespasses and thanks offerings. No fat nor blood is
to be eaten.

7:1. This also is the law of the sacrifice for a trespass: it is most
holy.

Trespass... Trespasses, for which these offerings were to be made, were
lesser offences than those for which the sin offerings were appointed.

7:2. Therefore where the holocaust is immolated, the victim also for a
trespass shall be slain: the blood thereof shall be poured round about
the altar.

7:3. They shall offer thereof the rump and the fat that covereth the
entrails:

7:4. The two little kidneys, and the fat which is by the flanks, and the
caul of the liver with the little kidneys.

7:5. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the burnt
sacrifice of the Lord for a trespass.

7:6. Every male of the priestly race, shall eat this flesh in a holy
place, because it is most holy.

7:7. As the sacrifice for sin is offered, so is also that for a
trespass: the same shall be the law of both these sacrifices. It shall
belong to the priest that offereth it.

7:8. The priest that offereth the victim of holocaust, shall have the
skin thereof.

7:9. And every sacrifice of flour that is baked in the oven, and
whatsoever is dressed on the gridiron, or in the fryingpan, shall be the
priest's that offereth it.

7:10. Whether they be tempered with oil, or dry, all the sons of Aaron
shall have one as much as another.

7:11. This is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings that is
offered to the Lord.

7:12. If the oblation be for thanksgiving, they shall offer loaves
without leaven tempered with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with
oil, and fine flour fried, and cakes tempered and mingled with oil.

7:13. Moreover loaves of leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanks,
which is offered for peace offerings:

7:14. Of which one shall be offered to the Lord for firstfruits, and
shall be the priest's that shall pour out the blood of the victim.

7:15. And the flesh of it shall be eaten the same day: neither shall any
of it remain until the morning.

7:16. If any man by vow, or of his own accord offer a sacrifice, it
shall in like manner be eaten the same day. And if any of it remain
until the morrow, it is lawful to eat it.

7:17. But whatsoever shall be found on the third day shall be consumed
with fire.

7:18. If any man eat of the flesh of the victim of peace offerings on
the third day, the oblation shall be of no effect: neither shall it
profit the offerer. Yea rather, whatsoever soul shall defile itself with
such meat, shall be guilty of transgression.

7:19. The flesh that hath touched any unclean thing, shall not be eaten:
but shall be burnt with fire. He that is clean shall eat of it.

7:20. If any one that is defiled shall eat of the flesh of the sacrifice
of peace offerings, which is offered to the Lord, he shall be cut off
from his people.

7:21. And he that hath touched the uncleanness of man, or of beast, or
of any thing that can defile, and shall eat of such kind of flesh: shall
be cut off from his people.

7:22. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

7:23. Say to the children of Israel: The fat of a sheep, and of an ox,
and of a goat you shall not eat.

7:24. The fat of a carcass that hath died of itself, and of a beast that
was caught by another beast, you shall have for divers uses.

7:25. If any man eat the fat that should be offered for the burnt
sacrifice of the Lord, he shall perish out of his people.

7:26. Moreover you shall not eat the blood of any creature whatsoever,
whether of birds or beasts.

7:27. Every one that eateth blood, shall perish from among the people.

7:28. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

7:29. Speak to the children of Israel, saying: He that offereth a victim
of peace offerings to the Lord, let him offer therewith a sacrifice
also, that is, the libations thereof.

7:30. He shall hold in his hands the fat of the victim, and the breast.
And when he hath offered and consecrated both to the Lord, he shall
deliver them to the priest,

7:31. Who shall burn the fat upon the altar. But the breast shall be
Aaron's and his sons'.

7:32. The right shoulder also of the victim, of peace offerings shall
fall to the priest for firstfruits.

7:33. He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood, and the fat:
he shall have the right shoulder also for his portion.

7:34. For the breast that is elevated and the shoulder that is separated
I have taken of the children of Israel, from off their victims of peace
offerings: and have given them to Aaron the priest, and to his sons, by
a law for ever, from all the people of Israel.

7:35. This is the anointing of Aaron and his sons, in the ceremonies of
the Lord, in the day when Moses offered them, that they might do the
office of priesthood,

7:36. And the things that the Lord commanded to be given them by the
children of Israel, by a perpetual observance in their generations.

7:37. This is the law of holocaust, and of the sacrifice for sin, and
for trespass, and for consecration, and the victims of peace offerings:

7:38. Which the Lord appointed to Moses in mount Sinai, when he
commanded the children of Israel, that they should offer their oblations
to the Lord in the desert of Sinai.

Leviticus Chapter 8

Moses consecrateth Aaron and his sons.

8:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

8:2. Take Aaron with his sons, their vestments, and the oil of unction:
a calf for sin, two rams, a basket with unleavened bread.

8:3. And thou shalt gather together all the congregation to the door of
the tabernacle.

8:4. And Moses did as the Lord had commanded. And all the multitude
being gathered together before the door of the tabernacle:

8:5. He said: This is the word that the Lord hath commanded to be done.

8:6. And immediately, he offered Aaron and his sons. And when he had
washed them,

8:7. He vested the high priest with the strait linen garment, girding
him with the girdle, and putting on him the violet tunick: and over it
he put the ephod.

8:8. And binding it with the girdle, he fitted it to the rational, on
which was Doctrine and Truth.

8:9. He put also the mitre upon his head: and upon the mitre over the
forehead, he put the plate of gold, consecrated with sanctification, as
the Lord had commanded him.

8:10. He took also the oil of unction, with which he anointed the
tabernacle, with all the furniture thereof.

8:11. And when he had sanctified and sprinkled the altar seven times, he
anointed it, and all the vessels thereof: and the laver with the foot
thereof, he sanctified with the oil.

8:12. And he poured it upon Aaron's head: and he anointed and
consecrated him.

8:13. And after he had offered his sons, he vested them with linen
tunicks, and girded them with girdles: and put mitres on them as the
Lord had commanded.

8:14. He offered also the calf for sin: and when Aaron and his sons had
put their hands upon the head thereof,

8:15. He immolated it: and took the blood, and dipping his finger in it,
he touched the horns of the altar round about. Which being expiated, and
sanctified, he poured the rest of the blood at the bottom thereof.

8:16. But the fat that was upon the entrails, and the caul of the liver,
and the two little kidneys, with their fat, he burnt upon the altar.

8:17. And the calf with the skin, and the flesh and the dung, he burnt
without the camp, as the Lord had commanded.

8:18. He offered also a ram for holocaust. And when Aaron and his sons
had put their hands upon its head:

8:19. He immolated it, and poured the blood thereof round about the
altar.

8:20. And cutting the ram into pieces, the head thereof, and the joints,
and the fat he burnt in the fire.

8:21. Having first washed the entrails, and the feet, and the whole ram
together he burnt upon the altar: because it was a holocaust of most
sweet odour to the Lord, as he had commanded him.

8:22. He offered also the second ram, in the consecration of priests:
and Aaron, and his sons put their hands upon the head thereof.

8:23. And when Moses had immolated it, he took of the blood thereof, and
touched the tip of Aaron's right ear, and the thumb of his right hand,
and in like manner also the great toe of his right foot.

8:24. He offered also the sons of Aaron: and when with the blood of the
ram that was immolated, he had touched the tip of the right ear of every
one of them, and the thumbs of their right hands, and the great toes of
their right feet, the rest he poured on the altar round about.

8:25. But the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that covereth the
entrails, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat,
and with the right shoulder, he separated.

8:26. And taking out of the basket of unleavened bread, which was before
the Lord, a loaf without leaven, and a cake tempered with oil and a
wafer, he put them upon the fat, and the right shoulder:

8:27. Delivering all to Aaron, and to his sons. Who having lifted them
up before the Lord,

8:28. He took them again from their hands, and burnt them upon the altar
of holocaust: because it was the oblation of consecration, for a sweet
odour of sacrifice to the Lord.

8:29. And he took of the ram of consecration, the breast for his
portion, elevating it before the Lord, as the Lord had commanded him.

8:30. And taking the ointment, and the blood that was upon the altar, he
sprinkled Aaron, and his vestments, and his sons, and their vestments
with it.

8:31. And when he had sanctified them in their vestments, he commanded
them, saying: Boil the flesh before the door of the tabernacle, and
there eat it. Eat ye also the loaves of consecration, that are laid in
the basket, as the Lord commanded me, saying: Aaron and his sons shall
eat them.

8:32. And whatsoever shall be left of the flesh and the loaves, shall be
consumed with fire.

8:33. And you shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle for seven
days, until the day wherein the time of your consecration shall be
expired. For in seven days the consecration is finished:

8:34. As at this present it hath been done, that the rite of the
sacrifice might be accomplished.

8:35. Day and night shall you remain in the tabernacle observing the
watches of the Lord, lest you die. For so it hath been commanded me.

8:36. And Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord spoke by the
hand of Moses.

Leviticus Chapter 9

Aaron offereth sacrifice for himself and the people. Fire cometh from
the Lord upon the altar.

9:1. And when the eighth day was come, Moses called Aaron and his sons,
and the ancients of Israel, and said to Aaron:

9:2. Take of the herd a calf for sin, and a ram for a holocaust, both
without blemish, and offer them before the Lord.

9:3. And to the children of Israel thou shalt say: Take ye a he-goat for
sin, and a calf, and a lamb, both of a year old, and without blemish for
a holocaust.

9:4. Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings. And immolate them
before the Lord, offering for the sacrifice of every one of them flour
tempered with oil: for to day the Lord will appear to you.

9:5. They brought therefore all things that Moses had commanded before
the door of the tabernacle: where when all the multitude stood,

9:6. Moses said: This is the word, which the Lord hath commanded. Do it,
and his glory will appear to you.

9:7. And he said to Aaron: Approach to the altar, and offer sacrifice
for thy sin. Offer the holocaust, and pray for thyself and for the
people: and when thou hast slain the people's victim, pray for them, as
the Lord hath commanded.

9:8. And forthwith Aaron, approaching to the altar, immolated the calf
for his sin.

9:9. And his sons brought him the blood of it: and he dipped his finger
therein, and touched the horns of the altar, and poured the rest at the
foot thereof.

9:10. And the fat, and the little kidneys, and the caul of the liver,
which are for sin, he burnt upon the altar, as the Lord had commanded
Moses.

9:11. But the flesh and skins thereof he burnt with fire without the
camp.

9:12. He immolated also the victim of holocaust: and his sons brought
him the blood thereof, which he poured round about on the altar.

9:13. And the victim being cut into pieces, they brought to him the head
and all the members: all which he burnt with fire upon the altar.

9:14. Having first washed the entrails and the feet with water.

9:15. Then offering for the sin of the people, he slew the he-goat: and
expiating the altar,

9:16. He offered the holocaust.

9:17. Adding in the sacrifice the libations, which are offered withal,
and burning them upon the altar, besides the ceremonies of the morning
holocaust.

9:18. He immolated also the bullock and the ram, and peace offerings of
the people: and his sons brought him the blood, which he poured upon the
altar round about.

9:19. The fat also of the bullock, and the rump of the ram, and the two
little kidneys with their fat, and the caul of the liver,

9:20. They put upon the breasts. And after the fat was burnt upon the
altar,

9:21. Aaron separated their breasts, and the right shoulders, elevating
them before the Lord, as Moses had commanded.

9:22. And stretching forth his hands to the people, he blessed them. And
so the victims for sin, and the holocausts, and the peace offerings
being finished, he came down.

9:23. And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the testimony, and
afterwards came forth and blessed the people. And the glory of the Lord
appeared to all the multitude.

9:24. And, behold, a fire, coming forth from the Lord, devoured the
holocaust, and the fat that was upon the altar: which when the multitude
saw, they praised the Lord, falling on their faces.

Leviticus Chapter 10

Nadab and Abiu for offering strange fire, are burnt by fire. Priests are
forbidden to drink wine, when they enter into the tabernacle. The law of
eating the holy things.

10:1. And Nadab and Abiu, the sons of Aaron, taking their censers, put
fire therein, and incense on it, offering before the Lord strange fire:
which was not commanded them.

10:2. And fire coming out from the Lord destroyed them: and they died
before the Lord.

10:3. And Moses said to Aaron: This is what the Lord hath spoken. I will
be sanctified in them that approach to me: and I will be glorified in
the sight of all the people. And when Aaron heard this, he held his
peace.

10:4. And Moses called Misael and Elisaphan, the sons of Oziel, the
uncle of Aaron, and said to them: Go and take away your brethren from
before the sanctuary, and carry them without the camp.

10:5. And they went forthwith and took them as they lay, vested with
linen tunicks, and cast them forth, as had been commanded them.

10:6. And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons:
Uncover not your heads, and rend not your garments, lest perhaps you
die, and indignation come upon all the congregation. Let your brethren,
and all the house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord has
kindled.

10:7. But you shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle: otherwise
you shall perish, for the oil of the holy unction is on you. And they
did all things according to the precept of Moses.

10:8. The Lord also said to Aaron:

10:9. You shall not drink wine nor any thing that may make drunk, thou
nor thy sons, when you enter into the tabernacle of the testimony, lest
you die. Because it is an everlasting precept; through your generations:

10:10. And that you may have knowledge to discern between holy and
unholy, between unclean and clean:

10:11. And may teach the children of Israel all my ordinances which the
Lord hath spoken to them by the hand of Moses.

10:12. And Moses spoke to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons
that were left: Take the sacrifice that is remaining of the oblation of
the Lord, and eat it without leaven beside the altar, because it is holy
of holies.

10:13. And you shall eat it in a holy place: which is given to thee and
thy sons of the oblations of the Lord, as it hath been commanded me.

10:14. The breast also that is offered, and the shoulder that is
separated, you shall eat in a most clean place, thou and thy sons, and
thy daughters with thee. For they are set aside for thee and thy
children, of the victims of peace offerings of the children of Israel.

10:15. Because they have elevated before the Lord the shoulder and the
breast, and the fat that is burnt on the altar: and they belong to thee
and to thy sons by a perpetual law, as the Lord hath commanded.

10:16. While these things were a doing, when Moses sought for the buck
goat, that had been offered for sin, he found it burnt. And being angry
with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron that were left, he said:

10:17. Why did you not eat in the holy place the sacrifice for sin,
which is most holy, and given to you, that you may bear the iniquity of
the people, and may pray for them in the sight of the Lord.

10:18. Especially, whereas none of the blood thereof hath been carried
within the holy places: and you ought to have eaten it in the sanctuary,
as was commanded me?

10:19. Aaron answered: This day hath been offered the victim for sin,
and the holocaust before the Lord: and to me what thou seest has
happened. How could I eat it, or please the Lord in the ceremonies,
having a sorrowful heart?

10:20. Which when Moses had heard he was satisfied.

Leviticus Chapter 11

The distinction of clean and unclean animals.

11:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

11:2. Say to the children of Israel: These are the animals which you are
to eat of all the living things of the earth.

Animals which you are to eat, etc... The prohibition of so many kinds of
beasts, birds, and fishes, in the law, was ordered, 1st, to exercise the
people in obedience, and temperance; 2ndly, to restrain them from the
vices of which these animals were symbols; 3rdly, because the things
here forbidden were for the most part unwholesome, and not proper to be
eaten; 4thly, that the people of God, by being obliged to abstain from
things corporally unclean, might be trained up to seek a spiritual
cleanness.

11:3. Whatsoever hath the hoof divided, and cheweth the cud among the
beasts, you shall eat.

Hoof divided, and cheweth the cud... The dividing of the hoof and
chewing of the cud, signify discretion between good and evil, and
meditating on the law of God; and where either of these is wanting a man
is unclean. In like manner fishes were reputed unclean that had not fins
and scales: that is, souls that did not raise themselves up by prayer
and cover themselves with the scales of virtue.

11:4. But whatsoever cheweth indeed the cud, and hath a hoof, but
divideth it not, as the camel, and others: that you shall not eat, but
shall reckon it among the unclean.

11:5. The cherogrillus which cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof,
is unclean.

The cherogrillus... Some suppose it to be the rabbit, others the
hedgehog. St. Jerome intimates that it is another kind of animal common
in Palestine, which lives in the holes of rocks or in the earth. We
choose here, as also in the names of several other creatures that follow
(which are little known in this part of the world,) to keep the Greek or
Latin names.

11:6. The hare also: for that too cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof.

11:7. And the swine, which, though it divideth the hoof, cheweth not the
cud.

11:8. The flesh of these you shall not eat, nor shall you touch their
carcasses, because they are unclean to you.

11:9. These are the things that breed in the waters, and which it is
lawful to eat. All that hath fins, and scales, as well in the sea, as in
the rivers, and the pools, you shall eat.

11:10. But whatsoever hath not fins and scales, of those things that
move and live in the waters, shall be an abomination to you,

11:11. And detestable. Their flesh you shall not eat: and their
carcasses you shall avoid.

11:12. All that have not fins and scales, in the waters, shall be
unclean.

11:13. Of birds these are they which you must not eat, and which are to
be avoided by you: The eagle, and the griffon, and the osprey.

The griffon... Not the monster which the painter represent, which hath
no being upon earth; but a bird of the eagle kind, larger than the
common.

11:14. And the kite, and the vulture, according to their kind.

11:15. And all that is of the raven kind, according to their likeness.

11:16. The ostrich, and the owl, and the larus, and the hawk according
to its kind.

11:17. The screech owl, and the cormorant, and the ibis.

11:18. And the swan, and the bittern, and the porphyrion.

11:19. The heron, and the charadroin according to its kind, the houp
also, and the bat.

11:20. Of things that fly, whatsoever goeth upon four feet, shall be
abominable to you.

11:21. But whatsoever walketh upon four feet, but hath the legs behind
longer, wherewith it hoppeth upon the earth,

11:22. That you shall eat: as the bruchus in its kind, the attacus, and
ophimachus, and the locust, every, one according to their kind.

11:23. But of flying things whatsoever hath four feet only, shall be an
abomination to you.

11:24. And whosoever shall touch the carcasses of them, shall be
defiled: and shall be unclean until the evening:

11:25. And if it be necessary that he carry any of these things when
they are dead: he shall wash his clothes, and shall be unclean until the
sun set.

11:26. Every beast that hath a hoof, but divideth it not, nor cheweth
the cud shall be unclean: and he that toucheth it, shall be defiled.

11:27. That which walketh upon hands of all animals which go on all
four, shall be unclean: he that shall touch their carcasses shall be
defiled until evening.

11:28. And he that shall carry such carcasses, shall wash his clothes,
and shall be unclean until evening: because all these things are unclean
to you.

11:29. These also shall be reckoned among unclean things, of all that
move upon the earth. The weasel, and the mouse, and the crocodile, every
one according to their kind:

11:30. The shrew, and the chameleon, and the stellio, and the lizard,
and the mole.

11:31. All these are unclean. He that toucheth their carcasses shall be
unclean until the evening.

11:32. And upon what thing soever any of their carcasses shall fall, it
shall be defiled, whether it be a vessel of wood, or a garment, or skins
or haircloths: or any thing in which work is done. They shall be dipped
in water, and shall be unclean until the evening, and so afterwards
shall be clean.

11:33. But an earthen vessel, into which any of these shall fall, shall
be defiled: and therefore is to be broken.

11:34. Any meat which you eat, if water from such a vessel be poured
upon it, shall be unclean; and every liquor that is drunk out of any
such vessel, shall be unclean.

11:35. And upon whatsoever thing any of these dead beasts shall fall, it
shall be unclean. Whether it be oven, or pots with feet, they shall be
destroyed, and shall be unclean.

11:36. But fountains and cisterns, and all gatherings together of waters
shall be clean. He that toucheth their carcasses shall be defiled.

11:37. If it fall upon seed corn, it shall not defile it.

11:38. But if any man pour water upon the seed, and afterwards it be
touched by the carcasses, it shall be forthwith defiled.

11:39. If any beast die, of which it is lawful for you to eat, he that
toucheth the carcass thereof, shall be unclean until the evening.

11:40. And he that eateth or carrieth any thing thereof, shall wash his
clothes, and shall be unclean until the evening.

11:41. All that creepeth upon the earth shall be abominable: neither
shall it be taken for meat.

11:42. Whatsoever goeth upon the breast on four feet, or hath many feet,
or traileth on the earth, you shall not eat, because it is abominable.

11:43. Do not defile your souls, nor touch aught thereof, lest you be
unclean,

11:44. For I am the Lord your God. Be holy because I am holy. Defile
not your souls by any creeping thing, that moveth upon the earth.

11:45. For I am the Lord, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that
I might be your God.

11:46. You shall be holy, because I am holy. This is the law of beasts
and fowls, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and
creepeth on the earth:

11:47. That you may know the differences of the clean, and unclean, and
know what you ought to eat, and what to refuse.

Leviticus Chapter 12

The purification of women after childbirth.

12:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

12:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: If a
woman having received seed shall bear a man child, she shall be unclean
seven days, according to the days of separation of her flowers.

12:3. And on the eighth day the infant shall be circumcised:

12:4. But she shall remain three and thirty days in the blood of her
purification. She shall touch no holy thing: neither shall she enter
into the sanctuary, until the days of her purification, be fulfilled.

12:5. But if she shall bear a maid child, she shall be unclean two
weeks, according to the custom of her monthly courses. And she shall
remain in the blood of her purification sixty-six days.

12:6. And when the days of her purification are expired, for a son, or
for a daughter, she shall bring to the door of the tabernacle of the
testimony, a lamb of a year old for a holocaust, and a young pigeon or a
turtle for sin: and shall deliver them to the priest.

12:7. Who shall offer them before the Lord, and shall pray for her: and
so she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is the law
for her that beareth a man child or a maid child.

12:8. And if her hand find not sufficiency, and she is not able to offer
a lamb, she shall take two turtles, or two young pigeons, one for a
holocaust, and another for sin: and the priest shall pray for her, and
so she shall be cleansed.

Leviticus Chapter 13

The law concerning leprosy in men, and in garments.

13:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

13:2. The man in whose skin or flesh shall arise a different colour or a
blister, or as it were something shining, that is the stroke of the
leprosy, shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or any or of his sons.

13:3. And if he see the leprosy in his skin, and the hair turned white
and the place where the leprosy appears lower than the skin and the rest
of the flesh: it is the stroke of the leprosy, and upon his judgment he
shall be separated.

13:4. But if there be a shining whiteness in the skin, and not lower
than the other flesh, and the hair be of the former colour, the priest
shall shut him up seven days.

13:5. And the seventh day he shall look on him: and if the leprosy be
grown no farther, and hath not spread itself in the skin, he shall shut
him up again other seven days.

13:6. And on the seventh day, he shall look on him. If the leprosy be
somewhat obscure, and not spread in the skin, he shall declare him
clean, because it is but a scab: and the man shall wash his clothes, and
shall be clean.

13:7. But, if the leprosy grow again, after he was seen by the priest
and restored to cleanness, he shall be brought to him:

13:8. And shall be condemned of uncleanness.

13:9. If the stroke of the leprosy be in a man, he shall be brought to
the priest:

13:10. And he shall view him. And when there shall be a white colour in
the skin, and it shall have changed the look of the hair, and the living
flesh itself shall appear:

13:11. It shall be judged an inveterate leprosy, and grown into the
skin. The priest therefore shall declare him unclean: and shall not shut
him up, because he is evidently unclean.

13:12. But if the leprosy spring out running about in the skin, and
cover all the skin from the head to the feet, whatsoever falleth under
the sight of the eyes:

13:13. The priest shall view him, and shall judge that the leprosy which
he has is very clean: because it is all turned into whiteness, and
therefore the man shall be clean.

13:14. But when the live flesh shall appear in him:

13:15. Then by the judgment of the priest he shall be defiled, and shall
be reckoned among the unclean. For live flesh, if it be spotted with
leprosy, is unclean.

13:16. And if again it be turned into whiteness, and cover all the man:

13:17. The priest shall view him, and shall judge him to be clean.

13:18. When also there has been an ulcer in the flesh and the skin, and
it has been healed:

13:19. And in the place of the ulcer, there appeareth a white scar, or
somewhat red, the man shall be brought to the priest.

13:20. And when he shall see the place of the leprosy lower than the
other flesh, and the hair turned white: he shall declare him unclean,
for the plague of leprosy is broken out in the ulcer.

13:21. But if the hair be of the former colour, and the scar somewhat
obscure, and be not lower than the flesh that is near it: he shall shut
him up seven days.

13:22. And if it spread, he shall judge him to have the leprosy:

13:23. But if it stay in its place, it is but the scar of an ulcer: and
the man shall be clean.

13:24. The flesh also and skin that hath been burnt, and after it is
healed hath a white or a red scar:

13:25. The priest shall view it, and if he see it turned white, and the
place thereof is lower than the other skin: he shall declare him
unclean, because the evil of leprosy is broken out in the scar.

13:26. But if the colour of the hair be not changed, nor the blemish
lower than the other flesh, and the appearance of the leprosy be
somewhat obscure: he shall shut him up seven days,

13:27. And on the seventh day he shall view him. If the leprosy be grown
farther in the skin, he shall declare him unclean.

13:28. But if the whiteness stay in its place, and be not very clear, it
is the sore of a burning: and therefore he shall be cleansed, because it
is only the scar of a burning.

13:29. If the leprosy break out in the head or the beard of a man or
woman, the priest shall see them,

13:30. And if the place be lower than the other flesh, and the hair
yellow, and thinner than usual: he shall declare them unclean, because
it is the leprosy of the head and the beard;

13:31. But if he perceive the place of the spot is equal with the flesh
that is near it, and the hair black: he shall shut him up seven days,

13:32. And on the seventh day he shall look upon it. If the spot be not
grown, and the hair keep its colour, and the place of the blemish be
even with the other flesh:

13:33. The man shall be shaven all but the place of the spot: and he
shall be shut up other seven days.

13:34. If on the seventh day the evil seem to have stayed in its place,
and not lower than the other flesh, he shall cleanse him: and his
clothes being washed he shall be clean.

13:35. But if after his cleansing the spot spread again in the skin:

13:36. He shall seek no more whether the hair be turned yellow, because
he is evidently unclean.

13:37. But if the spot be stayed, and the hair be black, let him know
that the man is healed: and let him confidently pronounce him clean.

13:38. If a whiteness appear in the skin of a man or a woman,

13:39. The priest shall view them. If he find that a darkish whiteness
shineth in the skin, let him know that it is not the leprosy, but a
white blemish, and that the man is clean.

13:40. The man whose hair falleth off from his head, he is bald and
clean:

13:41. And if the hair fall from his forehead, he is bald before and
clean.

13:42. But if in the bald head or in the bald forehead there be risen a
white or reddish colour:

13:43. And the priest perceive this, he shall condemn him undoubtedly of
leprosy which is risen in the bald part.

13:44. Now whosoever shall be defiled with the leprosy, and is separated
by the judgment of the priest:

13:45. Shall have his clothes hanging loose, his head bare, his mouth
covered with a cloth: and he shall cry out that he is defiled and
unclean.

13:46. All the time that he is a leper and unclean he shall dwell alone
without the camp.

13:47. A woollen or linen garment that shall have the leprosy

13:48. In the warp, and the woof: or skin, or whatsoever is made of a
skin:

13:49. If it be infected with a white or red spot, it shall be accounted
the leprosy, and shall be shewn to the priest.

13:50. And he shall look upon it and shall shut it up seven days.

13:51. And on the seventh day when he looketh on it again, if he find
that it is grown, it is a fixed leprosy. He shall judge the garment
unclean, and every thing wherein it shall be found.

13:52. And therefore it shall be burnt with fire.

13:53. But if he see that it is not grown,

13:54. He shall give orders, and they shall wash that part wherein the
leprosy is: and he shall shut it up other seven days.

13:55. And when he shall see that the former colour is not returned, nor
yet the leprosy spread, he shall judge it unclean: and shall burn it
with fire, for the leprosy has taken hold of the outside of the garment,
or through the whole.

13:56. But if the place of the leprosy be somewhat dark, after the
garment is washed, he shall tear it off, and divide it from that which
is sound.

13:57. And if after this there appear in those places that before were
without spot, a flying and wandering leprosy: it must be burnt with
fire.

13:58. If it cease, he shall wash with water the parts that are pure,
the second time: and they shall be clean.

13:59. This is the law touching the leprosy of any woollen or linen
garment, either in the warp or woof, or any thing of skins: how it ought
to be cleaned, or pronounced unclean.

Leviticus Chapter 14

The rites of sacrifices in cleansing the leprosy. Leprosy in houses.

14:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

14:2. This is the rite of a leper, when he is to be cleansed. He shall
be brought to the priest:

14:3. Who going out of the camp, when he shall find that the leprosy is
cleansed,

14:4. Shall command him that is to be purified, to offer for himself two
living sparrows, which it is lawful to eat, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop.

14:5. And he shall command one of the sparrows to be immolated in an
earthen vessel over living waters.

Living waters... That is, waters taken from a spring, brook, or river.

14:6. But the other that is alive, he shall dip, with the cedar wood,
and the scarlet and the hyssop, in the blood of the sparrow that is
immolated:

14:7. Wherewith he shall sprinkle him that is to be cleansed seven
times, that he may be rightly purified. And he shall let go the living
sparrow, that it may fly into the field.

14:8. And when the man hath washed his clothes, he shall shave all the
hair of his body, and shall be washed with water: and being purified he
shall enter into the camp, yet so that he tarry without his own tent
seven days.

14:9. And on the seventh day he shall shave the hair of his head, and
his beard and his eyebrows, and the hair of all his body. And having
washed again his clothes, and his body,

14:10. On the eighth day, he shall take two lambs without blemish, and
an ewe of a year old without blemish, and three tenths of flour tempered
with oil for a sacrifice, and a sextary of oil apart.

A sextary... Heb. log: a measure of liquids, which was the twelfth part
of a hin; and held about as much as six eggs.

14:11. And when the priest that purifieth the man, hath presented him,
and all these things before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of
the testimony:

14:12. He shall take a lamb, and offer it for a trespass offering with
the sextary of oil. And having offered all before the Lord,

14:13. He shall immolate the lamb, where the victim for sin is wont to
be immolated, and the holocaust, that is, in the holy place. For as that
which is for sin, so also the victim for a trespass offering pertaineth
to the priest: it is holy of holies.

14:14. And the priest taking of the blood of the victim that was
immolated for trespass, shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of
him that is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand and the great
toe of his right foot.

Taking of the blood, etc... These ceremonies used in the cleansing of a
leper, were mysterious and very significative. The sprinkling seven
times with the blood of the little bird, the washing himself and his
clothes, the shaving his hair and his beard, signify the means which are
to be used in the reconciliation of a sinner, and the steps by which he
is to return to God, viz., by the repeated application of the blood of
Christ: the washing his conscience with the waters of compunction: and
retrenching all vanities and superfluities, by employing all that is
over and above what is necessary in alms deeds. The sin offering, and
the holocaust or burnt offering, which he was to offer at his cleansing,
signify the sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart, and that of
adoration in spirit and truth, with gratitude and thankfulness, for the
forgiveness of sins, with which we are ever to appear before the
Almighty. The touching the right ear, the thumb of the right hand, and
the great toe of the right foot, first with the blood of the victim, and
then with the remainder of the oil, which had been sprinkled seven times
before the Lord, signify the application of the blood of Christ, and the
unction of the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost; to the sinner's right
ear, that he may duly hearken to and obey the law of God; and to his
right hand and foot, that the works of his hands, and all the steps or
affections of his soul, signified by the feet, may be rightly directed
to God.

14:15. And he shall pour of the sextary of oil into his own left hand,

14:16. And shall dip his right finger in it, and sprinkle it before the
Lord seven times.

14:17. And the rest of the oil in his left hand, he shall pour upon the
tip of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his
right hand and the great toe of his right foot, and upon the blood that
was shed for trespass:

14:18. And upon his head.

14:19. And he shall pray for him before the Lord, and shall offer the
sacrifice for sin. Then shall he immolate the holocaust.

14:20. And put it on the altar with the libations thereof: and the man
shall be rightly cleansed.

14:21. But if he be poor, and his hand cannot find the things aforesaid:
he shall take a lamb for an offering for trespass, that the priest may
pray for him, and a tenth part of flour tempered with oil for a
sacrifice, and a sextary of oil:

14:22. And two turtles or two young pigeons, of which one may be for
sin, and the other for a holocaust.

14:23. And he shall offer them on the eighth day of his purification to
the priest, at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony before the
Lord.

14:24. And the priest receiving the lamb for trespass, and the sextary
of oil, shall elevate them together.

14:25. And the lamb being immolated, he shall put of the blood thereof
upon the tip of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the
thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot.

14:26. But he shall pour part of the oil into his own left hand,

14:27. And dipping the finger of his right hand in it, he shall sprinkle
it seven times before the Lord.

14:28. And he shall touch the tip of the right ear of him that is
cleansed, and the thumb of his right hand and the great toe of his right
foot, in the place of the blood that was shed for trespass.

14:29. And the other part of the oil that is in his left hand, he shall
pour upon the head of the purified person, that he may appease the Lord
for him.

14:30. And he shall offer a turtle, or young pigeon:

14:31. One for trespass, and the other for a holocaust, with their
libations.

14:32. This is the sacrifice of a leper, that is not able to have all
things that appertain to his cleansing.

14:33. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

14:34. When you shall come into the land of Chanaan, which I will give
you for a possession, if there be the plague or leprosy in a house:

14:35. He whose house it is, shall go and tell the priest, saying: It
seemeth to me, that there is the plague of leprosy in my house,

14:36. And he shall command, that they carry forth all things out of the
house, before he go into it, and see whether it have the leprosy, let
all things become unclean that are in the house. And afterwards he shall
go in to view the leprosy of the house.

14:37. And if he see in the walls thereof as it were little dints,
disfigured with paleness or redness, and lower than all he rest:

14:38. He shall go out of the door of the house, and forthwith shut it
up seven days,

14:39. And returning on the seventh day, he shall look upon it. If he
find that the leprosy is spread,

14:40. He shall command, that the stones wherein the leprosy is, be
taken out, and cast without the city into an unclean place:

14:41. And that the house be scraped on the inside round about, and the
dust of the scrapings be scattered without the city into an unclean
place:

14:42. And that other stones be laid in the place of them that were
taken away, and the house be plastered with other mortar.

14:43. But if after the stones be taken out, and the dust scraped off,
and it be plastered with other earth.

14:44. The priest going in perceive that the leprosy is returned, and
the walls full of spots, it is a lasting leprosy, and the house is
unclean.

14:45. And they shall destroy it forthwith, and shall cast the stones
and timber thereof, and all the dust without the town into an unclean
place.

14:46. He that entereth into the house when it is shut, shall be unclean
until evening,

14:47. And he that sleepeth in it, and eateth any thing, shall wash his
clothes.

14:48. But if the priest going in perceive that the leprosy is not
spread in the house, after it was plastered again, he shall purify it,
it being cured.

14:49. And for the purification thereof he shall take two sparrows, and
cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.

14:50. And having immolated one sparrow in an earthen vessel, over
living waters,

14:51. He shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet,
and the living sparrow, and shall dip all in the blood of the sparrow
that is immolated, and in the living water: and he shall sprinkle the
house seven times.

14:52. And shall purify it as well with the blood of the sparrow, as
with the living water, and with the living sparrow, and with the cedar
wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet.

14:53. And when he hath let go the sparrow to fly freely away into the
field, he shall pray for the house: and it shall be rightly cleansed.

14:54. This is the law of every kind of leprosy and stroke.

14:55. Of the leprosy of garments and houses,

14:56. Of a scar and of blisters breaking out of a shining spot, and
when the colours are diversely changed:

14:57. That it may be known when a thing is clean or unclean.

Leviticus Chapter 15

Other legal uncleannesses.

15:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

15:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and say to them: The man that
hath an issue of seed, shall be unclean.

Issue of seed shall be unclean... These legal uncleannesses were
instituted in order to give the people a horror of carnal impurities.

15:3. And then shall he be judged subject to this evil, when a filthy
humour, at every moment, cleaveth to his flesh, and gathereth there.

15:4. Every bed on which he sleepeth, shall be unclean, and every place
on which he sitteth.

15:5. If any man touch his bed, he shall wash his clothes and being
washed with water, he shall be unclean until the evening.

15:6. If a man sit where that man hath sitten, he also shall wash his
clothes: and being washed with water, shall be unclean until the
evening.

15:7. He that toucheth his flesh, shall wash his clothes: and being
himself washed with water shall be unclean until the evening.

15:8. If such a man cast his spittle upon him that is clean, he shall
wash his clothes: and being washed with water, he shall be unclean until
the evening.

15:9. The saddle on which he hath sitten shall be unclean.

15:10. And whatsoever has been under him that hath the issue of seed,
shall be unclean until the evening. He that carrieth any of these
things, shall wash his clothes: and being washed with water, he shall be
unclean until the evening.

15:11. Every person whom such a one shall touch, not having washed his
hands before, shall wash his clothes: and being washed with water, shall
be unclean until the evening.

15:12. If he touch a vessel of earth, it shall be broken: but if a
vessel of wood, it shall be washed with water.

15:13. If he who suffereth this disease be healed, he shall number seven
days after his cleansing: and having washed his clothes, and all his
body in living water, he shall be clean.

15:14. And on the eighth day he shall take two turtles, or two young
pigeons, and he shall come before the Lord, to the door of the
tabernacle of the testimony, and shall give them to the priest.

15:15. Who shall offer one for sin, and the other for a holocaust: and
he shall pray for him before the Lord, that he may be cleansed of the
issue of his seed.

15:16. The man from whom the seed of copulation goeth out, shall wash
all his body with water: and he shall be unclean until the evening.

15:17. The garment or skin that he weareth, he shall wash with water:
and it shall be unclean until the evening.

15:18. The woman, with whom he copulateth, shall be washed with water:
and shall be unclean until the evening.

15:19. The woman, who at the return of the month, hath her issue of
blood, shall be separated seven days.

15:20. Every one that toucheth her, shall be unclean until the evening.

15:21. And every thing that she sleepeth on, or that she sitteth on in
the days of her separation, shall be defiled.

15:22. He that toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes: and being
himself washed with water, shall be unclean until the evening.

15:23. Whosoever shall touch any vessel on which she sitteth, shall wash
his clothes: and himself being washed with water, shall be defiled until
the evening.

15:24. If a man copulateth with her in the time of her flowers, he shall
be unclean seven days: and every bed on which he shall sleep, shall be
defiled.

15:25. The woman that hath still issue of blood many days out of her
ordinary time, or that ceaseth not to flow after the monthly courses, as
long as she is subject to this disease, shall be unclean, in the same
manner as if she were in her flowers.

15:26. Every bed on which she sleepeth, and every vessel on which she
sitteth, shall be defiled.

15:27. Whosoever toucheth them shall wash his clothes: and himself being
washed with water, shall be unclean until the evening.

15:28. If the blood stop and cease to run, she shall count seven days of
her purification:

15:29. And on the eighth day she shall offer for herself to the priest,
two turtles, or two young pigeons, at the door of the tabernacle of the
testimony:

15:30. And he shall offer one for sin, and the other for a holocaust,
and he shall pray for her before the Lord, and for the issue of her
uncleanness.

15:31. You shall teach therefore the children of Israel to take heed of
uncleanness, that they may not die in their filth, when they shall have
defiled my tabernacle that is among them.

15:32. This is the law of him that hath the issue of seed, and that is
defiled by copulation.

15:33. And of the woman that is separated in her monthly times, or that
hath a continual issue of blood, and of the man that sleepeth with her.

Leviticus Chapter 16

When and how the high priest must enter into the sanctuary. The feast of
expiation.

16:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, after the death of the two sons of
Aaron when they were slain upon their offering strange fire:

16:2. And he commanded him, saying: Speak to Aaron thy brother, that he
enter not at all into the sanctuary, which is within the veil before the
propitiatory, with which the ark is covered, lest he die, (for I will
appear in a cloud over the oracle),

Enter not... No one but the high priest, and he but once a year, could
enter into the sanctuary; to signify that no one could enter into the
sanctuary of heaven, till Christ our high priest opened it by his
passion. Heb. 10.8.

16:3. Unless he first do these things. He shall offer a calf for sin,
and a ram for a holocaust.

16:4. He shall be vested with a linen tunick: he shall cover his
nakedness with linen breeches: he shall be girded with a linen girdle,
and he shall put a linen mitre upon his head. For these are holy
vestments: all which he shall put on, after he is washed.

16:5. And he shall receive from the whole multitude of the children of
Israel two buck goats for sin, and one ram for a holocaust.

16:6. And when he hath offered the cattle and prayed for himself and for
his own house:

16:7. He shall make the two buck goats to stand before the Lord in the
door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

16:8. And casting lots upon them both, one to be offered to the Lord,
and the other to be the emissary goat:

16:9. That whose lot fell to be offered to the Lord, he shall offer for
sin.

16:10. But that whose lot was to be the emissary goat, he shall present
before the Lord, that he may pour prayers upon him, and let him go into
the wilderness.

16:11. After these things are duly celebrated, he shall offer the calf:
and praying for himself and for his own house, he shall immolate it.

16:12. And taking the censer, which he hath filled with the burning
coals of the altar, and taking up with his hands the compounded perfume
for incense, he shall go in within the veil into the holy place:

16:13. That when the perfumes are put upon the fire, the cloud and
vapour thereof may cover the oracle, which is over the testimony, and he
may not die.

16:14. He shall take also of the blood of the calf, and sprinkle with
his finger seven times towards the propitiatory to the east.

16:15. And when he hath killed the buck goat for the sin of the people,
he shall carry in the blood thereof within the veil, as he was commanded
to do with the blood of the calf, that he may sprinkle it over against
the oracle:

16:16. And may expiate the sanctuary from the uncleanness of the
children of Israel, and from their transgressions, and all their sins.
According to this rite shall he do to the tabernacle of the testimony,
which is fixed among them in the midst of the filth of their habitation.

16:17. Let no man be in the tabernacle when the high priest goeth into
the sanctuary, to pray for himself and his house, and for the whole
congregation of Israel, until he come out.

16:18. And when he is come out to the altar that is before the Lord, let
him pray for himself: and taking the blood of the calf, and of the buck
goat, let him pour it upon the horns thereof round about.

16:19. And sprinkling with his finger seven times, let him expiate, and
sanctify it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.

16:20. After he hath cleaned the sanctuary, and the tabernacle, and the
altar, then let him offer the living goat.

16:21. And putting both hands upon his head, let him confess all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their offences and sins.
And praying that they may light on its head, he shall turn him out by a
man ready for it, into the desert.

16:22. And when the goat hath carried all their iniquities into an
uninhabited land, and shall be let go into the desert:

16:23. Aaron shall return into the tabernacle of the testimony, and
putting off the vestments, which he had on him before when he entered
into the sanctuary, and leaving them there,

16:24. He shall wash his flesh in the holy place, and shall put on his
own garments. And after that he is come out and hath offered his own
holocaust, and that of the people, he shall pray both for himself, and
for the people.

16:25. And the fat that is offered for sins, he shall burn on the altar.

16:26. But he that hath let go the emissary goat, shall wash his
clothes, and his body with water, and so shall enter into the camp.

16:27. But the calf and the buck goat, that were sacrificed for sin, and
whose blood was carried into the sanctuary, to accomplish the atonement,
they shall carry forth without the camp, and shall burn with fire: their
skins and their flesh, and their dung.

16:28. And whosoever burneth them shall wash his clothes, and flesh with
water: and so shall enter into the camp.

16:29. And this shall be to you an everlasting ordinance. The seventh
month, the tenth day of the month, you shall afflict your souls, and
shall do no work, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger
that sojourneth among you.

16:30. Upon this day shall be the expiation for you, and the cleansing
from all your sins. You shall be cleansed before the Lord.

16:31. For it is a sabbath of rest: and you shall afflict your souls by
a perpetual religion.

16:32. And the priest that is anointed, and whose hands are consecrated
to do the office of the priesthood in his father's stead, shall make
atonement. And he shall be vested with the linen robe and the holy
vestments.

16:33. And he shall expiate the sanctuary and the tabernacle of the
testimony and the altar: the priest also and all the people.

16:34. And this shall be an ordinance for ever, that you pray for the
children of Israel, and for all their sins once a year. He did therefore
as the Lord had commanded Moses.

Leviticus Chapter 17

No sacrifices to be offered but at the door of the tabernacle: a
prohibition of blood.

17:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

17:2. Speak to Aaron and his sons, and to all the children of Israel,
saying to them: This is the word, which the Lord hath commanded, saying:

17:3. Any man whosoever of the house of Israel, if he kill an ox, or a
sheep, or a goat in the camp, or without the camp,

If he kill, etc... That is, in order to sacrifice. The law of God
forbids sacrifices to be offered in any other place but at the
tabernacle or temple of the Lord; to signify that no sacrifice would be
acceptable to God, out of his true temple, the one holy, catholic,
apostolic church.

17:4. And offer it not at the door of the tabernacle an oblation to the
Lord, shall be guilty of blood. As if he had shed blood, so shall he
perish from the midst of his people.

17:5. Therefore the children of Israel shall bring to the priest their
victims, which they kill in the field, that they may be sanctified to
the Lord before the door of the tabernacle of the testimony: and they
may sacrifice them for peace offerings to the Lord.

17:6. And the priest shall pour the blood upon the altar of the Lord, at
the door of the tabernacle of the testimony: and shall burn the fat for
a sweet odour to the Lord.

17:7. And they shall no more sacrifice their victims to devils, with
whom they have committed fornication. It shall be an ordinance for ever
to them and to their posterity.

17:8. And thou shalt say to them: The man of the house of Israel, and of
the strangers who sojourn among you, that offereth a holocaust or a
victim,

17:9. And bringeth it not to the door of the tabernacle of the
testimony, that it may be offered to the Lord, shall perish from among
his people.

17:10. If any man whosoever of the house of Israel, and of the strangers
that sojourn among them, eat blood, I will set my face against his soul,
and will cut him off from among his people.

Eat blood... To eat blood was forbidden in the law; partly, because God
reserved it to himself, to be offered in sacrifices on the altar, as to
the Lord of life and death; and as a figure of the blood of Christ; and
partly, to give men a horror of shedding blood. Gen. 9.4, 5, 6.

17:11. Because the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given
it to you, that you may make atonement with it upon the altar for your
souls, and the blood may be for an expiation of the soul.

17:12. Therefore I have said to the children of Israel: No soul of you,
nor of the strangers that sojourn among you, shall eat blood.

17:13. Any man whosoever of the children of Israel, and of the strangers
that sojourn among you, if by hunting or fowling, he take a wild beast
or a bird, which is lawful to eat, let him pour out its blood, and cover
it with earth.

17:14. For the life of all flesh is in the blood. Therefore I said to
the children of Israel: you shall not eat the blood of any flesh at all,
because the life of the flesh is in the blood, and whosoever eateth it,
shall be cut off.

17:15. The soul that eateth that which died of itself, or has been
caught by a beast, whether he be one of your own country or a stranger,
shall wash his clothes and himself with water, and shall be defiled
until the evening: and in this manner he shall be made clean.

17:16. But if he do not wash his clothes, and his body, he shall bear
his iniquity.

Leviticus Chapter 18

Marriage is prohibited in certain degrees of kindred: Anda all unnatural
lusts.

18:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

18:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: I am
the Lord your God.

18:3. You shall not do according to the custom of the land of Egypt, in
which you dwelt: neither shall you act according to the manner of the
country of Chanaan, into which I will bring you. Nor shall you walk in
their ordinances.

18:4. You shall do my judgments, and shall observe my precepts, and
shall walk in them. I am the Lord your God.

18:5. Keep my laws and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in
them, I am the Lord.

18:6. No man shall approach to her that is near of kin to him, to
uncover her nakedness. I am the Lord.

18:7. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father, or the
nakedness of thy mother: she is thy mother, thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness.

18:8. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's wife: for it
is the nakedness of thy father.

18:9. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy sister by father or by
mother: whether born at home or abroad.

18:10. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy son's daughter, or
thy daughter's daughter: because it is thy own nakedness.

18:11. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's wife's
daughter, whom she bore to thy father: and who is thy sister.

18:12. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister:
because she is the flesh of thy father.

18:13. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister:
because she is thy mother's flesh.

18:14. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother:
neither shalt thou approach to his wife, who is joined to thee by
affinity.

18:15. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law:
because she is thy son's wife, neither shalt thou discover her shame.

18:16. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife:
because it is the nakedness of thy brother.

18:17. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy wife and her
daughter. Thou shalt not take her son's daughter or her daughter's
daughter, to discover her shame: because they are her flesh, and such
copulation is incest.

18:18. Thou shalt not take thy wife's sister for a harlot, to rival her:
neither shalt thou discover her nakedness, while she is yet living.

18:19. Thou shalt not approach to a woman having her flowers: neither
shalt thou uncover her nakedness.

18:20. Thou shalt not lie with thy neighbour's wife: nor be defiled with
mingling of seed.

18:21. Thou shalt not give any of thy seed to be consecrated to the idol
Moloch, nor defile the name of thy God. I am the Lord.

18:22. Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind: because it is
an abomination.

18:23. Thou shalt not copulate with any beast: neither shalt thou be
defiled with it. A woman shall not lie down to a beast, nor copulate
with it: because it is a heinous crime.

Because it is a heinous crime... In Hebrew, this word heinous crime is
expressed by the word confusion, signifying the shamefulness and
baseness of this abominable sin.

18:24. Defile not yourselves with any of these things with which all the
nations have been defiled, which I will cast out before you,

18:25. And with which the land is defiled: the abominations of which I
will visit, that it may vomit out its inhabitants.

18:26. Keep ye my ordinances and my judgments: and do not any of these
abominations. Neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that
sojourneth among you.

18:27. For all these detestable things the inhabitants of the land have
done, that were before you, and have defiled it.

18:28. Beware then, lest in like manner, it vomit you also out, if you
do the like things: as it vomited out the nation that was before you.

18:29. Every soul that shall commit any of these abominations, shall
perish from the midst of his people.

18:30. Keep my commandments. Do not the things which they have done,
that have been before you: and be not defiled therein. I am the Lord
your God.

Leviticus Chapter 19

Divers ordinances, partly moral, partly ceremonial or judicial.

19:1. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

19:2. Speak to all the congregation of the children of Israel. And thou
shalt say to them: Be ye holy, because I the Lord your God am holy.

19:3. Let every one fear his father, and his mother. Keep my sabbaths. I
am the Lord your God.

19:4. Turn ye not to idols: nor make to yourselves molten gods. I am the
Lord your God.

19:5. If ye offer in sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord, that he may
be favourable:

19:6. You shall eat it on the same day it was offered, and the next day.
And whatsoever shall be left until the third day, you shall burn with
fire.

19:7. If after two days any man eat thereof, he shall be profane and
guilty of impiety:

19:8. And shall bear his iniquity, because he hath defiled the holy
thing of the Lord. And that soul shall perish from among his people.

19:9. When thou reapest the corn of thy land, thou shalt not cut down
all that is on the face of the earth to the very ground: nor shalt thou
gather the ears that remain.

19:10. Neither shalt thou gather the bunches and grapes that fall down
in thy vineyard: but shalt leave them to the poor and the strangers to
take. I am the Lord your God.

19:11. You shall not steal. You shall not lie: neither shall any man
deceive his neighbour.

19:12. Thou shalt not swear falsely by my name, nor profane the name of
thy God. I am the Lord.

19:13. Thou shalt not calumniate thy neighbour, nor oppress him by
violence. The wages of him that hath been hired by thee shall not abide
with thee until the morning.

19:14. Thou shalt not speak evil of the deaf, nor put a stumbling block
before the blind: but thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, because I am the
Lord.

19:15. Thou shalt not do that which is unjust, nor judge unjustly.
Respect not the person of the poor: nor honour the countenance of the
mighty. But judge thy neighbour according to justice.

19:16. Thou shalt not be a detractor nor a whisperer among the people.
Thou shalt not stand against the blood of thy neighbour. I am the Lord.

19:17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart: But reprove him
openly, lest thou incur sin through him.

19:18. Seek not revenge, nor be mindful of the injury of thy citizens.
Thou shalt love thy friend as thyself. I am the Lord.

19:19. Keep ye my laws. Thou shalt not make thy cattle to gender with
beasts of any other kind. Thou shalt not sow thy field with different
seeds. Thou shalt not wear a garment that is woven of two sorts.

Different seeds, etc... This law tends to recommend simplicity and plain
dealing in all things, and to teach the people not to join any false
worship or heresy with the worship of the true God.

19:20. If a man carnally lie with a woman that is a bondservant and
marriageable, and yet not redeemed with a price, nor made free: they
both shall be scourged: and they shall not be put to death, because she
was not a free woman.

19:21. And for his trespass he shall offer a ram to the Lord, at the
door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

19:22. And the priest shall pray for him: and for his sin before the
Lord: and he shall have mercy on him, and the sin shall be forgiven.

19:23. When you shall be come into the land, and shall have planted in
it fruit trees, you shall take away the firstfruits of them. The fruit
that comes forth shall be unclean to you: neither shall you eat of them.

Firstfruits... Proeputia, literally, their foreskins; it alludes to
circumcision, and signifies that for the first three years the trees
were to be as uncircumcised, and their fruit unclean: till in the fourth
year their increase was sanctified and given to the Lord, that is, to
the priests.

19:24. But in the fourth year, all their fruit shall be sanctified, to
the praise of the Lord.

19:25. And in the fifth year you shall eat the fruits thereof, gathering
the increase thereof. I am the Lord your God.

19:26. You shall not eat with blood. You shall not divine nor observe
dreams.

19:27. Nor shall you cut your hair roundwise: nor shave your beard.

19:28. You shall not make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead:
neither shall you make in yourselves any figures or marks. I am the
Lord.

19:29. Make not thy daughter a common strumpet, lest the land be
defiled, and filled with wickedness.

19:30. Keep ye my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.

19:31. Go not aside after wizards: neither ask any thing of soothsayers,
to be defiled by them. I am the Lord your God.

19:32. Rise up before the hoary head, and honour the person of the aged
man: and fear the Lord thy God. I am the Lord.

19:33. If a stranger dwell in your land, and abide among you, do not
upbraid hin:

19:34. But let him be among you as one of the same country. And you
shall love him as yourselves: for you were strangers in the land of
Egypt. I am the Lord your God.

19:35. Do not any unjust thing in judgment, in rule, in weight, or in
measure.

19:36. Let the balance be just and the weights equal, the bushel just,
and the sextary equal. I am the Lord your God, that brought you out of
the land of Egypt.

19:37. Keep all my precepts, and all my judgments: and do them. I am
the Lord.

Leviticus Chapter 20

Divers crimes to be punished with death.

20:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

20:2. Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: If any man of the
children Israel, or of the strangers that dwell in Israel, give of his
seed to the idol Moloch, dying let him die. The people of the land shall
stone him.

20:3. And I will set my face against him: and I will cut him off from
the midst of his people, because he hath given of his seed to Moloch,
and hath defiled my sanctuary, and profaned my holy name.

20:4. And if the people of the land neglecting, and as it were little
regarding my commandment, let alone the man that hath given of his seed
to Moloch, and will not kill him:

20:5. I will set my face against that man, and his kindred, and will cut
off both him and all that consented with him, to commit fornication with
Moloch, out of the midst of their people.

20:6. The soul that shall go aside after magicians, and soothsayers, and
shall commit fornication with them: I will set my face against that
soul, and destroy it out of the midst of its people.

20:7. Sanctify yourselves, and be ye holy: because I am the Lord your
God.

20:8. Keep my precepts, and do them. I am the Lord that sanctify you.

20:9. He that curseth his father, or mother, dying let him die. He hath
cursed his father, and mother: let his blood be upon him.

20:10. If any man commit adultery with the wife of another, and defile
his neighbour's wife: let them be put to death, both the adulterer and
the adulteress.

20:11. If a man lie with his stepmother, and discover the nakedness of
his father, let them both be put to death: their blood be upon them.

20:12. If any man lie with his daughter-in-law: let both die, because
they have done a heinous crime. Their blood be upon them.

20:13. If any one lie with a man as with a woman, both have committed an
abomination: let them be put to death. Their blood be upon them.

20:14. If any man after marrying the daughter, marry her mother, he hath
done a heinous crime. He shall be burnt alive with them: neither shall
so great an abomination remain in the midst of you.

20:15. He that shall copulate with any beast or cattle, dying let him
die: the beast also ye shall kill.

The beast also ye shall kill... The killing of the beast was for the
greater horror of the crime, and to prevent the remembrance of such
abaomination.

20:16. The woman that shall lie under any beast, shall be killed
together with the same. Their blood be upon them.

20:17. If any man take his sister, the daughter of his father, or the
daughter of his mother, and see her nakedness, and she behold her
brother's shame: they have committed a crime. They shall be slain, in
the sight of their people, because they have discovered one another's
nakedness. And they shall bear their iniquity.

20:18. If any man lie with a woman in her flowers, and uncover her
nakedness, and she open the fountain of her blood: both shall be
destroyed out of the midst of their people.

20:19. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy aunt by thy mother,
and of thy aunt by thy father. He that doth this, hath uncovered the
shame of his own flesh: both shall bear their iniquity.

20:20. If any man lie with the wife of his uncle by the father, or of
his uncle by the mother, and uncover the shame of his near akin, both
shall bear their sin. They shall die without children.

20:21. He that marrieth his brother's wife, doth an unlawful thing: he
hath uncovered his brother's nakedness. They shall be without children.

20:22. Keep my laws and my judgments, and do them: lest the land into
which you are to enter to dwell therein, vomit you also out.

20:23. Walk not after the laws of the nations, which I will cast out
before you. For they have done all these things: and therefore I
abhorred them.

20:24. But to you I say: Possess their land which I will give you for an
inheritance, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am the Lord your God,
who have separated you from other people.

20:25. Therefore do you also separate the clean beast from the unclean,
and the clean fowl from the unclean. Defile not your souls with beasts,
or birds, or any things that move on the earth, and which I have shewn
you to be unclean:

20:26. You shall be holy unto me, because I the Lord am holy: and I have
separated you from other people, that you should be mine.

20:27. A man, or woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divining
spirit, dying let them die. They shall stone them. Their blood be upon
them.

Leviticus Chapter 21

Ordinances relating to the priests.

21:1. The Lord said also to Moses: Speak to the priests the sons of
Aaron, and thou shalt say for them: Let not a priest incur an
uncleanness at the death of his citizens.

An uncleanness... Viz., such as was contracted in laying out the dead
body, or touching it; or in going into the house, or assisting at the
funeral, etc.

21:2. But only for his kin, such as are near in blood: that is to say,
for his father and for his mother, and for his son, and for his
daughter, for his brother also:

21:3. And for a maiden sister, who hath had no husband.

21:4. But not even for the prince of his people shall he do any thing
that may make him unclean.

21:5. Neither shall they shave their head, nor their beard, nor make
incisions in their flesh.

21:6. They shall be holy to their God, and shall not profane his name.
For they offer the burnt offering of the Lord, and the bread of their
God: and therefore they shall be holy.

21:7. They shall not take to wife a harlot or a vile prostitute, nor one
that has been put away from her husband: because they are consecrated to
their God,

21:8. And offer the loaves of proposition. Let them therefore be holy
because I also am holy: the Lord, who sanctify them.

21:9. If the daughter of a priest be taken in whoredom and dishonour the
name of her father, she shall be burnt with fire.

21:10. The high priest, that is to say, the priest who is the greatest
among his brethren, upon whose head the oil of unction hath been poured;
and whose hands have been consecrated for the priesthood; and who hath
been vested with the holy vestments. He shall not uncover his head: he
shall not rend his garments.

21:11. Nor shall he go in at all to any dead person: not even for his
father, or his mother, shall he be defiled.

21:12. Neither shall he go out of the holy places, lest he defile the
sanctuary of the Lord: because the oil of the holy unction of his God is
upon him. I am the Lord.

21:13. He shall take a virgin unto his wife.

21:14. But a widow or one that is divorced, or defied, or a harlot, he
shall not take: but a maid of his own people.

21:15. He shall not mingle the stock of his kindred with the common
people of this nation: for I am the Lord who sanctify him.

21:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

21:17. Say to Aaron: Whosoever of thy seed throughout their families,
hath a blemish, he shall not offer bread to his God.

21:18. Neither shall he approach to minister to him: If he be blind; if
he be lame; if he have a little, or a great, or a crooked nose;

21:19. If his foot, or if his hand be broken;

21:20. If he be crookbacked; or blear eyed; or have a pearl in his eye,
or a continual scab, or a dry scurf in his body, or a rupture.

21:21. Whosoever of the seed of Aaron the priest hath a blemish: he
shall not approach to offer sacrifices to the Lord, nor bread to his
God.

21:22. He shall eat nevertheless of the loaves that are offered in the
sanctuary.

21:23. Yet so that he enter not within the veil, nor approach to the
altar: because he hath a blemish, and he must not defile my sanctuary. I
am the Lord who sanctify them.

21:24. Moses, therefore spoke to Aaron, and to his sons and to all
Israel, all the things that had been commanded him.

Leviticus Chapter 22

Who may eat the holy things: and what things may be offered.

22:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses saying:

22:2. Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they beware of those things
that are consecrated of the children of Israel: and defile not the name
of the things sanctified to me, which they offer. I am the Lord.

22:3. Say to them and to their posterity: Every man of your race, that
approacheth to those things that are consecrated, and which the children
of Israel have offered to the Lord, in whom there is uncleanness, shall
perish before the Lord. I am the Lord.

Approacheth, etc... This is to give us to understand, with what purity
of soul we are to approach to the blessed sacrament of which these meats
that had been offered in sacrifice were a figure.

22:4. The man of the seed of Aaron, that is a leper, or that suffereth a
running of the seed, shall not eat of those things that are sanctified
to me, until he be healed. He that toucheth any thing unclean by
occasion of the dead: and he whose seed goeth from him as in generation:

22:5. And he that toucheth a creeping thing, or any unclean thing, the
touching of which is defiling:

22:6. Shall be unclean until the evening, and shall not eat those things
that are sanctified. But when he hath washed his flesh with water,

22:7. And the sun is down, then being purified, he shall eat of the
sanctified things, because it is his meat.

22:8. That which dieth of itself, and that which was taken by a beast,
they shall not eat, nor be defiled therewith. I am the Lord.

22:9. Let them keep my precepts, that they may not fall into sin, and
die in the sanctuary, when they shall have defiled it. I am the Lord who
sanctify them.

22:10. No stranger shall eat of the sanctified things: a sojourner of
the priests, or a hired servant, shall not eat of them.

22:11. But he whom the priest hath bought, and he that is his servant,
born in his house, these shall eat of them.

22:12. If the daughter of a priest be married to any of the people, she
shall not eat of those things that are sanctified nor of the
firstfruits.

22:13. But if she be a widow, or divorced, and having no children return
to her father's house, she shall eat of her father's meats, as she was
wont to do when she was a maid. No stranger hath leave to eat of them.

22:14. He that eateth of the sanctified things through ignorance, shall
add the fifth part with that which he ate, and shall give it to the
priest into the sanctuary.

22:15. And they shall not profane the sanctified things of the children
of Israel, which they offer to the Lord:

22:16. Lest perhaps they bear the iniquity of their trespass, when they
shall have eaten the sanctified things. I am the Lord who sanctify them.

22:17. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

22:18. Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the children of
Israel, and thou shalt say to them: The man of the house of Israel, and
of the strangers who dwell with you, that offereth his oblation, either
paying his vows, or offering of his own accord, whatsoever it be which
he presenteth for a holocaust of the Lord,

22:19. To be offered by you: it shall be a male without blemish of the
beeves, or of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20. If it have a blemish you shall not offer it: neither shall it be
acceptable.

22:21. The man that offereth a victim of peace offerings to the Lord,
either paying his vows, or offering of his own accord, whether of beeves
or of sheep, shall offer it without blemish, that it may be acceptable.
There shall be no blemish in it.

22:22. If it be blind, or broken, or have a scar or blisters, or a scab,
or a dry scurf: you shall not offer them to the Lord, nor burn any thing
of them upon the Lord's altar.

22:23. An ox or a sheep, that hath the ear and the tail cut off, thou
mayst offer voluntarily: but a vow may not be paid with them.

22:24. you shall not offer to the Lord any beast that hath the testicles
bruised, or crushed, or cut and taken away: neither shall you do any
such things in your land.

22:25. you shall not offer bread to your God, from the hand of a
stranger, nor any other thing that he would give: because they are all
corrupted, and defiled. You shall not receive them.

22:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

22:27. When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, they
shall be seven days under the udder of their dam: but the eighth day,
and thenceforth, they may be offered to the Lord.

22:28. Whether it be a cow, or a sheep, they shall not be sacrificed the
same day with their young ones.

22:29. If you immolate a victim for thanksgiving to the Lord, that he
may be favourable,

22:30. You shall eat it the same day. There shall not any of it remain
until the morning of the next day. I am the Lord.

22:31. Keep my commandments, and do them. I am the Lord.

22:32. Profane not my holy name, that I may be sanctified in the midst
of the children of Israel. I am the Lord who sanctify you:

22:33. And who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that I might be
your God. I am the Lord.

Leviticus Chapter 23

Holy days to be kept.

23:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

23:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: These
are the feasts of the Lord, which you shall call holy.

23:3. Six days shall ye do work: the seventh day, because it is the rest
of the sabbath, shall be called holy. You shall do no work on that day:
it is the sabbath of the Lord in all your habitations.

23:4. These also are the holy days of the Lord, which you must celebrate
in their seasons.

23:5. The first month, the fourteenth day of the month at evening, is
the phase of the Lord.

23:6. And the fifteenth day of the same month is the solemnity of the
unleavened bread of the Lord. Seven days shall you eat unleavened bread.

23:7. The first day shall be most solemn unto you, and holy: you shall
do no servile work therein.

23:8. But you shall offer sacrifice in fire to the Lord seven days. And
the seventh day shall be more solemn, and more holy: and you shall do no
servile work therein.

23:9. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

23:10. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: When
you shall have entered into the land which I will give you, and shall
reap your corn, you shall bring sheaves of ears, the firstfruits of your
harvest to the priest.

23:11. Who shall lift up the sheaf before the Lord, the next day after
the sabbath, that it may be acceptable for you, and shall sanctify it.

23:12. And on the same day that the sheaf is consecrated, a lamb without
blemish of the first year shall be killed for a holocaust of the Lord.

23:13. And the libations shall be offered with it: two tenths of flour
tempered with oil, for a burnt offering of the Lord, and a most sweet
odour. Libations also of wine, the fourth part of a hin.

23:14. You shall not eat either bread, or parched corn, or frumenty or
the harvest, until the day that you shall offer thereof to your God. It
is a precept for ever throughout your generations, and all your
dwellings.

23:15. You shall count therefore from the morrow after the sabbath,
wherein you offered the sheaf of firstfruits, seven full weeks.

23:16. Even unto the morrow after the seventh week be expired, that is
to say, fifty days: and so you shall offer a new sacrifice to the Lord.

23:17. Out of all your dwellings, two loaves of the firstfruits, of two
tenths of flour leavened, which you shall bake for the firstfruits of
the Lord.

23:18. And you shall offer with the loaves seven lambs without blemish
of the first year, and one calf from the herd, and they shall be for a
holocaust with their two rams: and they shall be for a holocaust with
their libations for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

23:19. You shall offer also a buck goat for sin, and two lambs of the
first year for sacrifices of peace offerings.

23:20. And when the priest hath lifted them up with the loaves of the
firstfruits before the Lord, they shall fall to his use.

23:21. And you shall call this day most solemn, and most holy. You
shall do no servile work therein. It shall be an everlasting ordinance
in all your dwellings and generations.

23:22. And when you reap the corn of your land, you shall not cut it to
the very ground: neither shall you gather the ears that remain. But you
shall leave them for the poor and for the strangers. I am the Lord your
God.

23:23. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

23:24. Say to the children of Israel: The seventh month, on the first
day of the month, you shall keep a sabbath, a memorial, with the sound
of trumpets, and it shall be called holy.

23:25. You shall do no servile work therein, and you shall offer a
holocaust to the Lord.

23:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

23:27. Upon the tenth day of this seventh month shall be the day of
atonement. It shall be most solemn, and shall be called holy: and you
shall await your souls on that day, and shall offer a holocaust to the
Lord.

23:28. You shall do no servile work in the time of this day: because it
is a day of propitiation, that the Lord your God may be merciful unto
you.

23:29. Every soul that is not afflicted on this day, shall perish from
among his people.

23:30. And every soul that shall do any work, the same will I destroy
from among his people.

23:31. You shall do no work therefore on that day: it shall be an
everlasting ordinance unto you in all your generations, and dwellings.

23:32. It is a sabbath of rest, and you shall afflict your souls
beginning on the ninth day of the month. From evening until evening you
shall celebrate your sabbaths.

23:33. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

23:34. Say to the children of Israel: From the fifteenth day of this
same seventh month, shall be kept the feast of tabernacles, seven days
to the Lord.

23:35. The first day shall be called most solemn and most holy: you
shall do no servile work therein. And seven days you shall offer
holocausts to the Lord.

23:36. The eighth day also shall be most solemn and most holy: and you
shall offer holocausts to the Lord. For it is the day of assembly and
congregation. You shall do no servile work therein.

23:37. These are the feasts of the Lord which you shall call most solemn
and most holy, and shall offer on them oblations to the Lord: holocausts
and libations according to the rite of every day.

23:38. Besides the sabbaths of the Lord, and your gifts, and those
things that you offer by vow, or which you shall give to the Lord
voluntarily.

23:39. So from the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you shall
have gathered in all the fruits of your land, you shall celebrate the
feast of the Lord seven days. On the first day and the eighth shall be a
sabbath: that is a day of rest.

23:40. And you shall take to you on the first day the fruits of the
fairest tree, and branches of palm trees, and boughs of thick trees, and
willows of the brook: And you shall rejoice before the Lord your God.

23:41. And you shall keep the solemnity thereof seven days in the year.
It shall be an everlasting ordinance in your generations. In the seventh
month shall you celebrate this feast.

23:42. And you shall dwell in bowers seven days. Every one that is of
the race of Israel, shall dwell in tabernacles:

23:43. That your posterity may know, that I made the children of Israel
to dwell in tabernacles, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I
am the Lord your God.

23:44. And Moses spoke concerning the feasts of the Lord to the children
of Israel.

Leviticus Chapter 24

The oil for the lamps. The loaves of proposition. The punishment of
blasphemy.

24:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

24:2. Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee the
finest and clearest oil of olives, to furnish the lamps continually,

24:3. Without the veil of the testimony in the tabernacle of the
covenant. And Aaron shall set them from evening until morning before the
Lord, by a perpetual service and rite in your generations.

24:4. They shall be set upon the most pure candlestick before the Lord
continually.

24:5. Thou shalt take also fine flour, and shalt bake twelve loaves
thereof, two tenths shall be in every loaf.

24:6. And thou shalt set them six and six, one against another, upon the
most clean table before the Lord.

24:7. And thou shalt put upon them the clearest frankincense, that the
bread may be for a memorial of the oblation of the Lord.

24:8. Every sabbath they shall be changed before the Lord: being
received of the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.

24:9. And they shall be Aaron's and his sons', that they may eat them in
the holy place: because it is most holy of the sacrifices of the Lord by
a perpetual right.

24:10. And behold there went out the son of a woman of Israel, whom she
had of an Egyptian, among the children of Israel: and fell at words in
the camp with a man of Israel.

24:11. And when he had blasphemed the name, and had cursed it, he was
brought to Moses. (Now his mother was called Salumith, the daughter of
Dabri, of the tribe of Dan.)

24:12. And they put him into prison, till they might know what the Lord
would command.

24:13. And the Lord spoke to Moses,

24:14. Saying: Bring forth the blasphemer without the camp: and let them
that heard him, put their hands upon his head: and let all the people
stone him.

24:15. And thou shalt speak to the children of Israel: The man that
curseth his God, shall bear his sin:

24:16. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die.
All the multitude shall stone him, whether he be a native or a stranger.
He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die.

24:17. He that striketh and killeth a man: dying let him die.

24:18. He that killeth a beast, shall make it good that is to say, shall
give beast for beast.

24:19. He that giveth a blemish to any of his neighbours: as he hath
done, so shall it be done to him:

24:20. Breach for breach, eye for ere, tooth for tooth, shall he
restore. What blemish he gave, the like shall he be compelled to suffer.

24:21. He that striketh a beast, shall render another. He that striketh
a man shall be punished.

24:22. Let there be equal judgment among you, whether he be a stranger,
or a native that offends: because I am the Lord your God.

24:23. And Moses spoke to the children of Israel. And they brought forth
him that had blasphemed, without the camp: and they stoned him. And the
children of Israel did as the Lord had commanded Moses.

Leviticus Chapter 25

The law of the seventh and of the fiftieth year of jubilee.

25:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses in mount Sinai, saying:

25:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: When
you shall have entered into the land which I will give you, observe the
rest of the sabbath of the Lord.

25:3. Six years thou shalt sow thy field and six years thou shalt prune
thy vineyard, and shalt gather the fruits thereof.

25:4. But in the seventh year there shall be a sabbath to the land, of
the resting of the Lord. Thou shalt not sow thy field, nor prune thy
vineyard.

25:5. What the ground shall bring forth of itself, thou shalt not reap:
neither shalt thou gather the grapes or the firstfruits as a vintage.
For it is a year of rest to the land.

25:6. But they shall be unto you for meat, to thee and to thy
man-servant, to thy maid-servant and thy hireling, and to the strangers
that sojourn with thee.

25:7. All things that grow shall be meat to thy beasts and to thy
cattle.

25:8. Thou shalt also number to thee seven weeks of years: that is to
say, seven times seven, which together make forty-nine years.

25:9. And thou shalt sound the trumpet in the seventh month, the tenth
day of the month, in the time of the expiation in all your land.

25:10. And thou shalt sanctify the fiftieth year, and shalt proclaim
remission to all the inhabitants of thy land: for it is the year of
jubilee. Every man shall return to his possession, and every one shall
go back to his former family:

Remission... That is, a general release and discharge from debts and
bondage, and a reinstating of every man in his former possessions.

25:11. Because it is the jubilee and the fiftieth year. You shall not
sow, nor reap the things that grow in the field of their own accord,
neither shall you gather the firstfruits of the vines,

25:12. Because of the sanctification of the jubilee. But as they grow
you shall presently eat them.

25:13. In the year of the jubilee all shall return to their possessions.

25:14. When thou shalt sell any thing to thy neighbour, or shalt buy of
him: grieve not thy brother. But thou shalt buy of him according to the
number of years from the jubilee.

25:15. And he shall sell to thee according to the computation of the
fruits.

25:16. The more years remain after the jubilee, the more shall the price
increase: and the less time is counted, so much the less shall the
purchase cost. For he shall sell to thee the time of the fruits.

25:17. Do not afflict your countrymen: but let every one fear his God.
Because I am the Lord your God.

25:18. Do my precepts, and keep my judgments, and fulfil them: that you
may dwell in the land without any fear.

25:19. And the ground may yield you its fruits, of which you may eat
your fill, fearing no man's invasion.

25:20. But if you say: What shall we eat the seventh year, if we sow
not, nor gather our fruits?

25:21. I will give you my blessing the sixth year: and it shall yield
the fruits of three years.

25:22. And the eighth year you shall sow, and shall eat of the old
fruits, until the ninth year: till new grow up, you shall eat the old
store.

25:23. The land also shall not be sold for ever: because it is mine, and
you are strangers and sojourners with me.

25:24. For which cause all the country of your possession shall be under
the condition of redemption.

25:25. If thy brother being impoverished sell his little possession, and
his kinsman will: he may redeem what he had sold.

25:26. But if he have no kinsman, and he himself can find the price to
redeem it:

25:27. The value of the fruits shall be counted from that time when he
sold it. And the overplus he shall restore to the buyer, and so shall
receive his possession again.

25:28. But if his hands find not the means to repay the price, the buyer
shall have what he bought, until the year of the jubilee. For in that
year all that is sold shall return to the owner, and to the ancient
possessor.

25:29. He that selleth a house within the walls of a city, shall have
the liberty to redeem it, until one year be expired.

25:30. If he redeem it not, and the whole year be fully out, the buyer
shall possess it, and his posterity for ever, and it cannot be redeemed,
not even in the jubilee.

25:31. But if the house be in a village, that hath no walls, it shall be
sold according to the same law as the fields. If it be not redeemed
before, in the jubilee it shall return to the owner.

25:32. The houses of Levites, which are in cities, may always be
redeemed.

25:33. If they be not redeemed, in the jubilee they shall all return to
the owners: because the houses of the cities of the Levites are for
their possessions among the children of Israel.

25:34. But let not their suburbs be sold, because it is a perpetual
possession.

25:35. If thy brother be impoverished, and weak of hand, and thou
receive him as a stranger and sojourner, and he live with thee:

25:36. Take not usury of him nor more than thou gavest. Fear thy God,
that thy brother may live with thee.

25:37. Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury: nor exact of him
any increase of fruits.

25:38. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
that I might give you the land of Chanaan, and might be your God.

25:39. If thy brother constrained by poverty, sell himself to thee: thou
shalt not oppress him with the service of bondservants.

25:40. But he shall be as a hireling, and a sojourner: he shall work
with thee until the year of the jubilee.

25:41. And afterwards he shall go out with his children: and shall
return to his kindred and to the possession of his fathers.

25:42. For they are my servants, and I brought them out of the land of
Egypt: let them not be sold as bondmen.

25:43. Afflict him not by might: but fear thy God.

25:44. Let your bondmen, and your bondwomen, be of the nations that are
round about you:

25:45. And of the strangers that sojourn among you, or that were born of
them in your land. These you shall have for servants:

25:46. And by right of inheritance shall leave them to your posterity,
and shall possess them for ever. But oppress not your brethren the
children of Israel by might.

25:47. If the hand of a stranger or a sojourner grow strong among you,
and thy brother being impoverished sell himself to him, or to any of his
race:

25:48. After the sale he may be redeemed. He that will of his brethren
shall redeem him:

25:49. Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, or his kinsman, by blood,
or by affinity. But if he himself be able also, he shall redeem himself:

25:50. Counting only the years from the time of his selling unto the
year of the jubilee: and counting the money that he was sold for,
according to the number of the years and the reckoning of a hired
servant.

25:51. If there be many years that remain until the jubilee, according
to them shall he also repay the price.

25:52. If few, he shall make the reckoning with him according to the
number of the years: and shall repay to the buyer of what remaineth of
the years.

25:53. His wages being allowed for which he served before: he shall not
afflict him violently in thy sight.

25:54. And if by these means he cannot be redeemed, in the year of the
jubilee he shall go out with his children.

25:55. For the children of Israel are my servants, whom I brought forth
out of the land of Egypt.

Leviticus Chapter 26

God's promises to them that keep his commandments. And the many
punishments with which he threatens transgressors.

26:1. I am the Lord your God. You shall not make to yourselves any idol
or graven thing: neither shall you erect pillars, nor set up a
remarkable stone in your land, to adore it. For I am the Lord your God.

26:2. Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.

26:3. If you walk in my precepts, and keep my commandments, and do them,
I will give you rain in due seasons.

26:4. And the ground shall bring forth its increase: and the trees shall
be filled with fruit.

26:5. The threshing of your harvest shall reach unto the vintage, and
the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and you shall eat your
bread to the full, and dwell in your land without fear.

26:6. I will give peace in your coasts: you shall sleep, and there shall
be none to make you afraid. I will take away evil beasts: and the sword
shall not pass through your quarters.

26:7. You shall pursue your enemies: and they shall fall before you.

26:8. Five of yours shall pursue a hundred others: and a hundred of you
ten thousand. Your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.

26:9. I will look on you, and make you increase: you shall be
multiplied, and I will establish my covenant with you.

26:10. You shall eat the oldest of the old store: and, new coming on,
you shall cast away the old.

26:11. I will set my tabernacle in the midst of you: and my soul shall
not cast you off.

26:12. I will walk among you, and will be your God: and you shall be my
people.

26:13. I am the Lord your God: who have brought you out of the land of
the Egyptians, that you should not serve them: and who have broken the
chains of your necks, that you might go upright.

26:14. But if you will not hear me, nor do all my commandments:

26:15. If you despise my laws, and contemn my judgments so as not to do
those things which are appointed by me, and to make void my covenant:

26:16. I also will do these things to you. I will quickly visit you with
poverty, and burning heat, which shall waste your eyes, and consume your
lives. You shall sow your seed in vain, which shall be devoured by your
enemies.

26:17. I will set my face against you, and you shall fall down before
your enemies: and shall be made subject to them that hate you. You shall
flee when no man pursueth you.

26:18. But if you will not yet for all this obey me: I will chastise you
seven times more for your sins.

26:19. And I will break the pride of your stubbornness: and I will make
to you the heaven above as iron, and the earth as brass.

26:20. Your labour shall be spent in vain: the ground shall not bring
forth her increase: nor the trees yield their fruit.

26:21. If you walk contrary to me, and will not hearken to me, I will
bring seven times more plagues upon you for your sins.

26:22. And I will send in upon you the beasts of the field, to destroy
you and your cattle, and make you few in number: and that your highways
may be desolate.

26:23. And if even so you will not amend, but will walk contrary to me:

26:24. I also will walk contrary to you, and will strike you seven times
for your sins.

26:25. And I will bring in upon you the sword that shall avenge my
covenant. And when you shall flee into the cities, I will send the
pestilence in the midst of you. And you shall be delivered into the
hands of your enemies,

26:26. After I shall have broken the staff of your bread: so that ten
women shall bake your bread in one oven, and give it out by weight: and
you shall eat, and shall not be filled,

26:27. But if you will not for all this hearken to me, but will walk
against me,

26:28. I will also go against you with opposite fury: and I will
chastise you with seven plagues for your sins,

26:29. So that you shall eat the flesh of your sons and of your
daughters.

26:30. I will destroy your high places, and break your idols. You shall
fall among the ruins of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.

26:31. Insomuch that I will bring your cities to be a wilderness: and I
will make your sanctuaries desolate: and will receive no more your sweet
odours.

26:32. And I will destroy your land: and your enemies shall be
astonished at it, when they shall be the inhabitants thereof.

26:33. And I will scatter you among the Gentiles: and I will draw out
the sword after you. And your land shall be desert, and your cities
destroyed.

26:34. Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths all the days of her
desolation. When you shall be

26:35. In the enemy's land, she shall keep a sabbath, and rest in the
sabbaths of her desolation: because she did not rest in your sabbaths,
when you dwelt therein.

26:36. And as to them that shall remain of you I will send fear in their
hearts in the countries of their enemies. The sound of a flying leaf
shall terrify them: and they shall flee as it were from the sword. They
shall fall, when no man pursueth them.

26:37. And they shall every one fall upon their brethren as fleeing from
wars: none of you shall dare to resist your enemies.

26:38. You shall perish among the Gentiles: and an enemy's land shall
consume you.

26:39. And if of them also some remain, they shall pine away in their
iniquities, in the land of their enemies: and they shall be afflicted
for the sins of their fathers, and their own.

26:40. Until they confess their iniquities, and the iniquities of their
ancestors, whereby they have transgressed against me, and walked
contrary unto me.

26:41. Therefore I also will walk against them, and bring them into
their enemies' land until their uncircumcised mind be ashamed. Then
shall they pray for their sins.

26:42. And I will remember my covenant, that I made with Jacob, and
Isaac, and Abraham. I will remember also the land:

26:43. Which when she shall be left by them, shall enjoy her sabbaths,
being desolate for them. But they shall pray for their sins, because
they rejected my judgments, and despised my laws.

26:44. And yet for all that when they were in the land of their enemies,
I did not cast them off altogether. Neither did I so despise them that
they should be quite consumed: and I should make void my covenant with
them. For I am the Lord their God.

26:45. And I will remember my former covenant, when I brought them out
of the land of Egypt, in the sight of the Gentiles, to be their God. I
am the Lord. These are the judgments, and precepts, and laws, which the
Lord gave between him and the children of Israel, in mount Sinai, by the
hand of Moses.

Leviticus Chapter 27

Of vows and tithes.

27:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

27:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: The
man that shall have made a vow, and promised his soul to God, shall give
the price according to estimation.

27:3. If it be a man from twenty years old unto sixty years old, he
shall give fifty sicles of silver, after the weight of the sanctuary:

27:4. If a woman, thirty.

27:5. But from the fifth year until the twentieth, a man shall give
twenty sicles: a woman ten.

27:6. From one month until the fifth year, for a male shall be given
five sicles: for a female three.

27:7. A man that is sixty years old or upward, shall give fifteen
sicles: a woman ten.

27:8. If he be poor, and not able to pay the estimation, he shall stand
before the priest: and as much as he shall value him at, and see him
able to pay, so much shall he give.

27:9. But a beast that may be sacrificed to the Lord, if any one shall
vow, shall be holy,

27:10. And cannot be changed: that is to say, neither a better for a
worse, nor a worse for a better. And if he shall change it: both that
which was changed, and that for which it was changed, shall be
consecrated to the Lord.

27:11. An unclean beast, which cannot be sacrificed to the Lord, if any
man shall vow, shall be brought before the priest:

27:12. Who judging whether it be good or bad, shall set the price.

27:13. Which, if he that offereth it will give, he shall add above the
estimation the fifth part.

27:14. If a man shall vow his house, and sanctify it to the Lord, the
priest shall consider it, whether it be good or bad: and it shall be
sold according to the price, which he shall appoint.

27:15. But if he that vowed, will redeem it, he shall give the fifth
part of the estimation over and above: and shall have the house.

27:16. And if he vow the field of his possession, and consecrate it to
the Lord, the price shall be rated according to the measure of the seed.
If the ground be sown with thirty bushels of barley, let it be sold for
fifty sicles of silver.

27:17. If he vow his field immediately from the year of jubilee that is
beginning: as much as it may be worth, at so much it shall be rated.

27:18. But if some time after, the priest shall reckon the money
according to the number of years that remain until the jubilee, and the
price shall be abated.

27:19. And if he that had vowed, will redeem his field, he shall add the
fifth part of the money of the estimation, and shall possess it.

27:20. And if he will not redeem it, but it be sold to any other man, he
that vowed it, may not redeem it any more.

27:21. For when the day of jubilee cometh, it shall be sanctified to the
Lord, and as a possession consecrated, pertaineth to the right of the
priest.

27:22. If a field that was bought, and not of a man's ancestors'
possession, be sanctified to the Lord:

27:23. The priest shall reckon the price according to the number of
years, unto the jubilee. And he that had vowed, shall give that to the
Lord.

27:24. But in the jubilee, it shall return to the former owner, who had
sold it, and had it in the lot of his possession.

27:25. All estimation shall be made according to the sicle of the
sanctuary. A sicle hath twenty obols.

27:26. The firstborn, which belong to the Lord, no man may sanctify and
vow: whether it be bullock, or sheep, they are the Lord's.

27:27. And if it be an unclean beast, he that offereth it shall redeem
it, according to thy estimation, and shall add the fifth part of the
price. If he will not redeem it, it shall be sold to another for how
much soever it was estimated by thee.

27:28. Any thing that is devoted to the Lord, whether it be man, or
beast, or field, shall not be sold: neither may it be redeemed.
Whatsoever is once consecrated shall be holy of holies to the Lord.

27:29. And any consecration that is offered by man, shall not be
redeemed, but dying shall die.

27:30. All tithes of the land, whether of corn, or of the fruits of
trees, are the Lord's, and are sanctified to him.

27:31. And if any man will redeem his tithes, he shall add the fifth
part of them.

27:32. Of all the tithes of oxen, and sheep, and goats, that pass under
the shepherd's rod, every tenth that cometh shall be sanctified to the
Lord.

27:33. It shall not be chosen neither good nor bad, neither shall it be
changed for another. If any man change it: both that which was changed,
and that for which it was changed, shall be sanctified to the Lord, and
shall not be redeemed.

27:34. These are the precepts which the Lord commanded Moses for the
children of Israel in mount Sinai.









THE BOOK OF NUMBERS

This fourth Book of Moses is called NUMBERS, because it begins with the
numbering of the people. The Hebrews, from its first words, call it
VAIEDABBER. It contains the transactions of the Israelites from the
second month of the second year after their going out of Egypt, until
the beginning of the eleventh month of the fortieth year; that is, a
history almost of thirty-nine years.


Numbers Chapter 1

The children of Israel are numbered: the Levites are designed to serve
the tabernacle.

1:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai in the
tabernacle of the covenant, the first day of the second month, the
second year of their going out of Egypt, saying:

1:2. Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel by
their families, and houses, and the names of every one, as many as are
of the male sex,

1:3. From twenty years old and upwards, of all the men of Israel fit for
war, and you shall number them by their troops, thou and Aaron.

1:4. And there shall be with you the princes of the tribes, and of the
houses in their kindreds,

1:5. Whose names are these: Of Ruben, Elisur the son of Sedeur.

1:6. Of Simeon, Salamiel the son of Surisaddai.

1:7. Of Juda, Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

1:8. Of Issachar, Nathanael the son of Suar.

1:9. Of Zabulon, Eliab the son of Helon.

1:10. And of the sons of Joseph: of Ephraim, Elisama the son of Ammiud:
of Manasses, Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.

1:11. Of Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gedeon.

1:12. Of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammisaddai.

1:13. Of Aser, Phegiel the son of Ochran.

1:14. Of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Duel.

1:15. Of Nephtali, Ahira the son of Enan.

1:16. These are the most noble princes of the multitude by their tribes
and kindreds, and the chiefs of the army of Israel:

1:17. Whom Moses and Aaron took with all the multitude of the common
people:

1:18. And assembled them on the first day of the second month, reckoning
them up by the kindreds, and houses, and families, and heads, and names
of every one from twenty years old and upward,

1:19. As the Lord had commanded Moses. And they were numbered in the
desert of Sinai.

1:20. Of Ruben the eldest son of Israel, by their generations and
families and houses and names of every head, all that were of the male
sex, from twenty years old and upward, that were able to go forth to
war,

1:21. Were forty-six thousand five hundred.

1:22. Of the sons of Simeon by their generations and families, and
houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names and heads of
every one, all that were of the male sex, from twenty years old and
upward, that were able to go forth to war,

1:23. Fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

1:24. Of the sons of Gad, by their generations and families and houses
of their kindreds were reckoned up by the names of every one from twenty
years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:25. Forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

1:26. Of the sons of Juda, by their generations and families and houses
of their kindreds, by the names of every one from twenty years old and
upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:27. Were reckoned up seventy-four thousand six hundred.

1:28. Of the sons of Issachar, by their generations and families and
houses of their kindreds, by the names of every one from twenty years
old and upward, all that could go forth to war,

1:29. Were reckoned up fifty-four thousand four hundred.

1:30. Of the sons of Zabulon, by the generations and families and houses
of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:31. Fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

1:32. Of the sons of Joseph, namely, of the sons of Ephraim, by the
generations and families and houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up
by the names of every one, from twenty years old and upward, all that
were able to go forth to war,

1:33. Forty thousand five hundred.

1:34. Moreover of the sons of Manasses, by the generations and families
and houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
from twenty years old and upward, all that could go forth to war,

1:35. Thirty-two thousand two hundred.

1:36. Of the sons of Benjamin, by their generations and families and
houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:37. Thirty-five thousand four hundred.

1:38. Of the sons of Dan, by their generations and families and houses
of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:39. Sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

1:40. Of the sons of Aser, by their generations and families and houses
of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

1:41. Forty-one thousand and five hundred.

1:42. Of the sons of Nephtali, by their generations and families and
houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
from twenty years old and upward, were able to go forth to war,

1:43. Fifty-three thousand four hundred.

1:44. These are they who were numbered by Moses and Aaron, and the
twelve princes of Israel, every one by the houses of their kindreds.

1:45. And the whole number of the children of Israel by their houses and
families, from twenty years old and upward, that were able to go to war,

1:46. Were six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men.

1:47. But the Levites in the tribes of their families were not numbered
with them.

1:48. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

1:49. Number not the tribe of Levi, neither shalt thou put down the sum
of them with the children of Israel:

1:50. But appoint them over the tabernacle of the testimony, and all the
vessels thereof, and whatsoever pertaineth to the ceremonies. They shall
carry the tabernacle and all the furniture thereof: and they shall
minister, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.

1:51. When you are to go forward, the Levites shall take down the
tabernacle: when you are to camp, they shall set it up. What stranger
soever cometh to it, shall be slain.

1:52. And the children of Israel shall camp every man by his troops and
bands and army.

1:53. But the Levites shall pitch their tents round about the
tabernacle, lest there come indignation upon the multitude of the
children of Israel, and they shall keep watch, and guard the tabernacle
of the testimony.

1:54. And the children of Israel did according to all things which the
Lord had commanded Moses.

Numbers Chapter 2

The order of the tribes in their camp.

2:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

2:2. All the children of Israel shall camp by their troops, ensigns, and
standards, and the houses of their kindreds, round about the tabernacle
of the covenant.

2:3. On the east Juda shall pitch his tents by the bands of his army:
and the prince of his sons; shall be Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

2:4. And the whole sum of the fighting men of his stock, were seventy-
four thousand six hundred.

2:5. Next unto him they of the tribe of Issachar encamped, whose prince
was Nathanael, the son of Suar.

2:6. And the whole number of his fighting men were fifty-four thousand
four hundred.

2:7. In the tribe of Zabulon the prince was Eliab the son of Helon.

2:8. And all the army of fighting men of his stock, were fifty-seven
thousand four hundred.

2:9. All that were numbered in the camp of Juda, were a hundred and
eighty-six thousand four hundred: and they by their troops shall march
first.

2:10. In the camp of the sons of Ruben, on the south side, the prince
shall be Elisur the son of Sedeur:

2:11. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
forty-six thousand five hundred.

2:12. Beside him camped they of the tribe of Simeon: whose prince was
Salamiel the son of Surisaddai.

2:13. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

2:14. In the tribe of Gad the prince was Eliasaph the son of Duel.

2:15. And the whole army of his fighting men that were numbered, were
forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

2:16. All that were reckoned up in the camp of Ruben, were a hundred and
fifty-one thousand four hundred and fifty, by their troops: they shall
march in the second place.

2:17. And the tabernacle of the testimony shall be carried by the
officers of the Levites and their troops. As it shall be set up, so
shall it be taken down. Every one shall march according to their places,
and ranks.

2:18. On the west side shall be the camp of the sons of Ephraim, whose
prince was Elisama the son of Ammiud.

2:19. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were forty
thousand five hundred.

2:20. And with them the tribe of the sons of Manasses, whose prince was
Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.

2:21. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
thirty-two thousand two hundred.

2:22. In the tribe of the sons of Benjamin the prince was Abidan the son
of Gedeon.

2:23. And the whole army of fighting men, that were reckoned up, were
thirty-five thousand four hundred.

2:24. All that were numbered in the camp of Ephraim, were a hundred and
eight-thousand one hundred by their troops: they shall march in the
third place.

2:25. On the north side camped the sons of Dan: whose prince was Ahiezar
the son of Ammisaddai.

2:26. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

2:27. Beside him they of the tribe of Aser pitched their tents: whose
prince was Phegiel the son of Ochran.

2:28. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
forty-one thousand five hundred.

2:29. Of the tribe of the sons of Nephtali the prince was Ahira the son
of Enan.

2:30. The whole army of his fighting men, were fifty-three thousand four
hundred.

2:31. All that were numbered in the camp of Dan, were a hundred and
fifty-seven thousand six hundred: and they shall march last.

2:32. This is the number of the children of Israel, of their army
divided according to the houses of their kindreds and their troops, six
hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.

2:33. And the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel:
for so the Lord had commanded Moses.

2:34. And the children of Israel did according to all things that the
Lord had commanded. They camped by their troops, and marched by the
families and houses of their fathers.

Numbers Chapter 3

The Levites are numbered and their offices distinguished. They are taken
in the place of the firstborn of the children of Israel.

3:1. These are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the
Lord spoke to Moses in mount Sinai.

3:2. And these the names of the sons of Aaron: his firstborn Nadab, then
Abiu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.

3:3. These the names of the sons of Aaron the priests that were
anointed, and whose hands were filled and consecrated, to do the
functions of priesthood.

3:4. Now Nadab and Abiu died, without children, when they offered
strange fire before the Lord, in the desert of Sinai: and Eleazar and
Ithamar performed the priestly office in the presence of Aaron their
father.

3:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

3:6. Bring the tribe of Levi, and make them stand in the sight of Aaron
the priest to minister to him, and let them watch,

3:7. And observe whatsoever appertaineth to the service of the multitude
before the tabernacle of the testimony,

3:8. And let them keep the vessels of the tabernacle, serving in the
ministry thereof.

3:9. And thou shalt give the Levites for a gift,

3:10. To Aaron and to his sons, to whom they are delivered by the
children of Israel. But thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons over the
service of priesthood. The stranger that approacheth to minister, shall
be put to death.

3:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

3:12. I have taken the Levites from the children of Israel, for every
firstborn that openeth the womb among the children of Israel, and the
Levites shall be mine.

3:13. For every firstborn is mine: since I struck the firstborn in the
land of Egypt: I have sanctified to myself whatsoever is firstborn in
Israel both of man and beast, they are mine: I am the Lord.

3:14. And the Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai, saying:

3:15. Number the sons of Levi by the houses of their fathers and their
families, every male from one month and upward.

3:16. Moses numbered them as the Lord had commanded.

3:17. And there were found sons of Levi by their names, Gerson and Caath
Merari.

3:18. The sons of Gerson: Lebni and Semei.

3:19. The sons of Caath: Amram, and Jesaar, Hebron and Oziel:

3:20. The sons of Merari, Moholi and Musi.

3:21. Of Gerson were two families, the Lebnites, and the Semeites:

3:22. Of which were numbered, people of the male sex from one month and
upward, seven thousand five hundred.

3:23. These shall pitch behind the tabernacle on the west,

3:24. Under their prince Eliasaph the son of Lael.

3:25. And their charge shall be in the tabernacle of the covenant:

3:26. The tabernacle itself and the cover thereof, the hanging that is
drawn before the doors of the tabernacle of the covenant, and the
curtains of the court: the hanging also that is hanged in the entry of
the court of the tabernacle, and whatsoever belongeth to the rite of the
altar, the cords of the tabernacle, and all the furniture thereof.

3:27. Of the kindred of Caath come the families of the Amramites and
Jesaarites and Hebronites and Ozielites. These are the families of the
Caathites reckoned up by their names:

3:28. All of the male sex from one month and upward, eight thousand six
hundred: they shall have the guard of the sanctuary,

3:29. And shall camp on the south side.

3:30. And their prince shall be Elisaphan the son of Oziel:

3:31. And they shall keep the ark, and the table and the candlestick,
the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary, wherewith they minister,
and the veil, and all the furniture of this kind.

3:32. And the prince of the princes of the Levites, Eleazar, the son of
Aaron the priest, shall be over them that watch for the guard of the
sanctuary.

3:33. And of Merari are the families of the Moholites, and Musites,
reckoned up by their names:

3:34. All of the male-kind from one month and upward, six thousand two
hundred.

3:35. Their prince Suriel the son of Abihaiel: their shall camp on the
north side.

3:36. Under their custody shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and the
bars, and the pillars and their sockets, and all things that pertain to
this kind of service:

3:37. And the pillars of the court round about with their sockets, and
the pins with their cords.

3:38. Before the tabernacle of the covenant, that is to say on the east
side shall Moses and Aaron camp, with their sons, having the custody of
the sanctuary, in the midst of the children of Israel. What stranger
soever cometh unto it, shall be put to death.

3:39. All the Levites, that I Moses and Aaron numbered according to the
precept of the Lord, by their f families, of the male-kind from one
month and upward, were twenty-two thousand.

3:40. And the Lord said to Moses: Number the firstborn of the male sex
of the children of Israel, from one month and upward, and thou shalt
take the sum of them.

3:41. And thou shalt take the Levites to me for all the firstborn of the
children of Israel, I am the Lord: and their cattle for all the
firstborn of the cattle of the children of Israel:

3:42. Moses reckoned up, as the Lord had commanded, the firstborn of the
children of Israel:

3:43. And the males by their names, from one month and upward, were
twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.

3:44. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

3:45. Take the Levites for the firstborn of the children of Israel, and
the cattle of the Levites for their cattle, and the Levites shall be
mine. I am the Lord.

3:46. But for the price of the two hundred and seventy-three, of the
firstborn of the children of Israel, that exceed the number of the
Levites,

3:47. Thou shalt take five sicles for every bead, according to the
weight of the sanctuary. A sicle hath twenty obols.

3:48. And thou shalt give the money to Aaron and his sons, the price of
them that are above.

3:49. Moses therefore took the money of them that were above, and whom
they had redeemed from the Levites,

3:50. For the firstborn of the children of Israel, one thousand three
hundred and sixty-five sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary,

3:51. And gave it to Aaron and his sons according to the word that the
Lord had commanded him.

Numbers Chapter 4

The age and time of the Levites' service: their offices and burdens.

4:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, and Aaron, saying:

4:2. Take the sum of the sons of Caath from the midst of the Levites, by
their houses and families.

4:3. From thirty years old and upward, to fifty years old, of all that
go in to stand and to minister in the tabernacle of the covenant.

4:4. This is the service of the sons of Caath:

4:5. When the camp is; to set forward, Aaron and his sons shall go into
the tabernacle of the covenant, and the holy of holies, and shall take
down the veil that hangeth before the door, and shall wrap up the ark of
the testimony in it,

4:6. And shall cover it again with a cover of violet skins, and shall
spread over it a cloth all of violet, and shall put in the bars.

4:7. They shall wrap up also the table of proposition in a cloth of
violet, and shall put with it the censers and little mortars, the cups
and bowls to pour out the libations: the loaves shall be always on it:

4:8. And they shall spread over it a cloth of scarlet, which again they
shall cover with a covering of violet skins, and shall put in the bars.

4:9. They shall take also a cloth of violet wherewith they shall cover
the candlestick with the lamps and tongs thereof and the snuffers and
all the oil vessels, which are necessary for the dressing of the lamps:

4:10. And over all they shall put a cover of violet skins and put in the
bars.

4:11. And they shall wrap up the golden altar also in a cloth of violet,
and shall spread over it a cover of violet skins, and put in the bars.

4:12. All the vessels wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, they
shall wrap up in a cloth of violet, and shall spread over it a cover of
violet skins, and put in the bars.

4:13. They shall cleanse the altar also from the ashes, and shall wrap
it up in a purple cloth,

4:14. And shall put it with all the vessels that they use in the
ministry thereof, that is to say, firepans, fleshhooks and forks,
pothooks and shovels. They shall cover all the vessels of the altar
together with a covering of violet skins, and shall put in the bars.

4:15. And when Aaron and his sons have wrapped up the sanctuary and the
vessels thereof at the removing of the camp, then shall the sons of
Caath enter in to carry the things wrapped up: and they shall not touch
the vessels of the sanctuary, lest they die. These are the burdens of
the sons of Caath: in the tabernacle of the covenant:

4:16. And over them shall be Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, to
whose charge pertaineth the oil to dress the lamps, and the sweet
incense, and the sacrifice, that is always offered, and the oil of
unction, and whatsoever pertaineth to the service of the tabernacle, and
of all the vessels that are in the sanctuary.

4:17. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

4:18. Destroy not the people of Caath from the midst of the Levites:

4:19. But do this to them, that they may live, and not die, by touching
the holies of holies. Aaron and his sons shall go in, and they shall
appoint every man his work, and shall divide the burdens that every man
is to carry.

4:20. Let not others by any curiosity see the things that are in the
sanctuary before they be wrapped up, otherwise they shall die.

4:21. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

4:22. Take the sum of the sons of Gerson also by their houses and
families and kindreds.

4:23. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old. Number
them all that go in and minister in the tabernacle of the covenant.

4:24. This is the office of the family of the Gersonites:

4:25. To carry the curtains of the tabernacle and the roof of the
covenant, the other covering, and the violet covering over all, and the
hanging that hangeth in the entry of the tabernacle of the covenant,

4:26. The curtains of the court, and the veil in the entry that is
before tabernacle. All things that pertain to the altar, the cords and
the vessels of the ministry,

4:27. The sons of Gerson shall carry, by the commandment of Aaron and
his sons: and each man shall know to what burden he must be assigned.

4:28. This is the service of the family of the Gersonites in the
tabernacle of the covenant, and they shall be under the hand of Ithamar
the son of Aaron the priest.

4:29. Thou shalt reckon up the sons of Merari also by the families and
houses of their fathers,

4:30. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
go in to the office of their ministry, and to the service of the
covenant of the testimony.

4:31. These are their burdens: They shall carry the boards of the
tabernacle and the bars thereof, the pillars and their sockets,

4:32. The pillars also of the court round about, with their sockets and
pins and cords. They shall receive by account all the vessels and
furniture, and so shall carry them.

4:33. This is the office of the family of the Merarites, and their
ministry in the tabernacle of the covenant: and they shall be under the
hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

4:34. So Moses and Aaron and the princes of the synagogue reckoned up
the sons of Caath, by their kindreds and the houses of their fathers,

4:35. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
go in to the ministry of the tabernacle of the covenant:

4:36. And they were found two thousand seven hundred and fifty.

4:37. This is the number of the people of Caath that go in to the
tabernacle of the covenant: these did Moses and Aaron number according
to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

4:38. The sons of Gerson also were numbered by the kindreds and houses
of their fathers,

4:39. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
go in to minister in the tabernacle of the covenant:

4:40. And they were found two thousand six hundred and thirty.

4:41. This is the people of the Gersonites, whom Moses and Aaron
numbered according to the word of the Lord.

4:42. The sons of Merari also were numbered by the kindreds and houses
of their fathers,

4:43. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
go in to fulfil the rites of the tabernacle of the covenant:

4:44. And they were found three thousand two hundred.

4:45. This is the number of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron
reckoned up according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of
Moses.

4:46. All that were reckoned up of the Levites, and whom Moses and Aaron
and the princes of Israel took by name, by the kindreds and houses of
their fathers,

4:47. From thirty years old and upward, until fifty years old, that go
into the ministry of the tabernacle, and to carry the burdens,

4:48. Were in all eight thousand five hundred and eighty.

4:49. Moses reckoned them up according to the word of the Lord, every
one according to their office and burdens, as the Lord had commanded
him.

Numbers Chapter 5

The unclean are removed out of the camp: confession of sins, and
satisfaction: firstfruits and oblations belonging to the priests: trial
of jealousy.

5:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

5:2. Command the children of Israel, that they cast out of the camp
every leper, and whosoever hath an issue of seed, or is defiled by the
dead:

5:3. Whether it be man or woman, cast ye them out of the camp, lest they
defile it when I shall dwell with you,

5:4. And the children of Israel did so, and they cast them forth without
the camp, as the Lord had spoken to Moses.

5:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

5:6. Say to the children of Israel: When a man or woman shall have
committed any of all the sins that men are wont to commit, and by
negligence shall have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and
offended,

5:7. They shall confess their sin, and restore the principal itself, and
the fifth part over and above, to him against whom they have sinned.

Shall confess... This confession and satisfaction, ordained in the Old
Law, was a figure of the sacrament of penance.

5:8. But if there be no one to receive it, they shall give it to the
Lord, and it shall be the priest's, besides the ram that is offered for
expiation, to be an atoning sacrifice.

5:9. All the firstfruits also, which the children of Israel offer,
belong to the priest:

5:10. And whatsoever is offered into the sanctuary by every one, and is
delivered into the hands of the priest, it shall be his.

5:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

5:12. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: The
man whose wife shall have gone astray, and contemning her husband,

5:13. Shall have slept with another man, and her husband cannot discover
it, but the adultery is secret, and cannot be proved by witnesses,
because she was not found in the adultery:

5:14. If the spirit of jealousy stir up the husband against his wife,
who either is defiled, or is charged with false suspicion,

The spirit of jealousy, etc... This ordinance was designed to clear the
innocent, and to prevent jealous husbands from doing mischief to their
wives: as likewise to give all a horror of adultery, by punishing it in
so remarkable a manner.

5:15. He shall bring her to the priest, and shall offer an oblation for
her, the tenth part of a measure of barley meal: he shall not pour oil
thereon, nor put frankincense upon it: because it is a sacrifice of
jealousy, and an oblation searching out adultery.

5:16. The priest therefore shall offer it, and set it before the Lord.

5:17. And he shall take holy water in an earthen vessel, and he shall
cast a little earth of the pavement of the tabernacle into it.

5:18. And when the woman shall stand before the Lord, he shall uncover
her head, and shall put on her hands the sacrifice of remembrance, and
the oblation of jealousy: and he himself shall hold the most bitter
waters, whereon he hath heaped curses with execration.

5:19. And he shall adjure her, and shall say: If another man hath not
slept with thee, and if thou be not defiled by forsaking thy husband's
bed, these most bitter waters, on which I have heaped curses, shall not
hurt thee.

5:20. But if thou hast gone aside from thy husband, and art defiled, and
hast lain with another man:

5:21. These curses shall light upon thee: The Lord make thee a curse,
and an example for all among his people: may he make thy thigh to rot,
and may thy belly swell and burst asunder.

5:22. Let the cursed waters enter into thy belly, and may thy womb swell
and thy thigh rot. And the woman shall answer, Amen, amen.

5:23. And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and shall wash
them out with the most bitter waters, upon which he hath heaped the
curses,

5:24. And he shall give them her to drink. And when she hath drunk them
up,

5:25. The priest shall take from her hand the sacrifice of jealousy, and
shall elevate it before the Lord, and shall put it upon the altar: yet
so as first,

5:26. To take a handful of the sacrifice of that which is offered, and
burn it upon the altar: and so give the most bitter waters to the woman
to drink.

5:27. And when she hath drunk them, if she be defiled, and having
despised her husband be guilty of adultery, the malediction shall go
through her, and her belly swelling, her thigh shall rot: and the woman
shall be a curse, and an example to all the people.

5:28. But if she be not defiled, she shall not be hurt, and shall bear
children.

5:29. This is the law of jealousy. If a woman hath gone aside from her
husband, and be defiled,

5:30. And the husband stirred up by the spirit of jealousy bring her
before the Lord, and the priest do to her according to all things that
are here written:

5:31. The husband shall be blameless, and she shall bear her iniquity.

Numbers Chapter 6

The law of the Nazarites: the form of blessing the people.

6:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: When a
man, or woman, shall make a vow to be sanctified, and will consecrate
themselves to the Lord:

6:3. They shall abstain from wine, and from every thing that may make a
man drunk. They shall not drink vinegar of wine, or of any other drink,
nor any thing that is pressed out of the grape: nor shall they eat
grapes either fresh or dried.

6:4. All the days that they are consecrated to the Lord by vow: they
shall eat nothing that cometh of the vineyard, from the raisin even to
the kernel.

6:5. All the time of his separation no razor shall pass over his head,
until the day be fulfilled of his consecration to the Lord. He shall be
holy, and shall let the hair of his head grow.

6:6. All the time of his consecration he shall not go in to any dead,

6:7. Neither shall he make himself unclean, even for his father, or for
his mother, or for his brother, or for his sister, when they die,
because the consecration of his God is upon his head.

6:8. All the days of his separation he shall be holy to the Lord.

6:9. But if any man die suddenly before him: the head of his
consecration shall be defiled: and he shall shave it forthwith on the
same day of his purification, and again on the seventh day.

6:10. And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
pigeons to the priest in the entry of the covenant of the testimony.

6:11. And the priest shall offer one for sin, and the other for a
holocaust, and shall pray for him, for that he hath sinned by the dead:
and he shall sanctify his head that day:

6:12. And shall consecrate to the Lord the days of his separation,
offering a lamb of one year for sin: yet so that the former days be made
void, because his sanctification was profaned.

6:13. This is the law of consecration. When the days which he had
determined by vow shall be expired, he shall bring him to the door of
the tabernacle of the covenant,

6:14. And shall offer his oblation to the Lord: one he lamb of a year
old without blemish for a holocaust, and one ewe lamb of a year old
without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for a
victim of peace offering,

6:15. A basket also of unleavened bread, tempered with oil, and wafers
without leaven anointed with oil, and the libations of each:

6:16. And the priest shall present them before the Lord, and shall offer
both the sin offering and the holocaust.

6:17. But the ram he shall immolate for a sacrifice of peace offering to
the Lord, offering at the same time the basket of unleavened bread, and
the libations that are due by custom.

6:18. Then shall the hair of the consecration of the Nazarite, be shaved
off before the door of the tabernacle of the covenant: and he shall take
his hair, and lay it upon the fire, which is under the sacrifice of the
peace offerings.

6:19. And shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened
cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and he shall deliver
them into the hands of the Nazarite, after his head is shaven.

6:20. And receiving them again from him, he shall elevate them in the
sight of the Lord: and they being sanctified shall belong to the priest,
as the breast, which was commanded to be separated, and the shoulder.
After this the Nazarite may drink wine.

6:21. This is the law of the Nazarite, when he hath vowed his oblation
to the Lord in the time of his consecration, besides those things which
his hand shall find, according to that which he had vowed in his mind,
so shall he do for the fulfilling of his sanctification.

6:22. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

6:23. Say to Aaron and his sons: Thus shall you bless the children of
Israel, and you shall say to them:

6:24. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee.

6:25. The Lord shew his face to thee, and have mercy on thee.

6:26. The Lord turn his countenance to thee, and give thee peace.

6:27. And they shall invoke my name upon the children of Israel, and I
will bless them.

Numbers Chapter 7

The offerings of the princes at the dedication of the tabernacle. God
speaketh to Moses from the propitiatory.

7:1. And it came to pass in the day that Moses had finished the
tabernacle, and set it up, and had anointed and sanctified it with all
its vessels, the altar likewise and all the vessels thereof,

7:2. The princes of Israel and the heads of the families, in every
tribe, who were the rulers of them who had been numbered, offered

7:3. Their gifts before the Lord, six wagons covered, and twelve oxen.
Two princes offered one wagon, and each one an ox, and they offered them
before the tabernacle.

7:4. And the Lord said to Moses:

7:5. Receive them from them to serve in the ministry of the tabernacle,
and thou shalt deliver them to the Levites according to the order of
their ministry.

7:6. Moses therefore receiving the wagons and the oxen, delivered them
to the Levites.

7:7. Two wagons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gerson, according
to their necessity.

7:8. The other four wagons, and eight oxen he gave to the sons of
Merari, according to their offices and service, under the hand of
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

7:9. But to the sons of Caath he gave no wagons or oxen: because they
serve in the sanctuary and carry their burdens upon their own shoulders.

7:10. And the princes offered for the dedication of the altar on the day
when it was anointed, their oblation before the altar.

7:11. And the Lord said to Moses: Let each of the princes one day after
another offer their gifts for the dedication of the altar.

7:12. The first day Nahasson the son of Aminadab of the tribe of Juda
offered his offering:

7:13. And his offering was a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty
sicles, a silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight of the
sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:14. A little mortar of ten sicles of gold full of incense:

7:15. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:16. And a buck goat for sin:

7:17. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
five he-goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of
Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

7:18. The second day Nathanael the son of Suar, prince of the tribe of
Issachar, made his offering,

7:19. A silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a silver
bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary, both
full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:20. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:21. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:22. And a buck goat for sin:

7:23. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
five buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of
Nathanael the son of Suar.

7:24. The third day the prince of the sons of Zabulon, Eliab the son of
Helon,

7:25. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:26. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:27. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:28. And a buck goat for sin:

7:29. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
five buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This is the oblation of Eliab
the son of Helon.

7:30. The fourth day the prince of the sons of Ruben, Elisur the son of
Sedeur,

7:31. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:32. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:33. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old, for a
holocaust:

7:34. And a buck goat for sin:

7:35. And for victims of peace offerings two oxen, five rams, five buck
goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Elisur the son
of Sedeur.

7:36. The fifth day the prince of the sons of Simeon, Salamiel the son
of Surisaddai,

7:37. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles after the weight of the sanctuary, both
full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:38. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:39. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:40. And a buck goat for sin:

7:41. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Salamiel
the son of Surisaddai.

7:42. The sixth day the prince of the sons of Gad, Eliasaph the son of
Duel,

7:43. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:44. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:45. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:46. And a buck goat for sin:

7:47. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph
the son of Duel.

7:48. The seventh day the prince of the sons of Ephraim, Elisama the son
of Ammiud,

7:49. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:50. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:51. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:52. And a buck goat for sin:

7:53. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Elisama
the son of Ammiud.

7:54. The eighth day the prince of the sons of Manasses, Gamaliel the
son of Phadassur,

7:55. Offered a silver dish, weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:56. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:57. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:58. And a buck goat for sin:

7:59. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel
the son of Phadassur.

7:60. The ninth day the prince of the sons of Benjamin, Abidan the son
of Gedeon,

7:61. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:62. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:63. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:64. And a buck goat for sin:

7:65. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Abidan
the son of Gedeon.

7:66. The tenth day the princes of the sons of Dan, Ahiezer the son of
Ammisaddai,

7:67. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:68. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:69. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:70. And a buck goat for sin:

7:71. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer
the son of Ammisaddai.

7:72. The eleventh day the prince of the sons of Aser, Phegiel the son
of Ochran,

7:73. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:74. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:75. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:76. And a buck goat for sin:

7:77. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Phegiel
the son of Ochran.

7:78. The twelfth day the prince of the sons of Nephtali, Ahira the son
of Enan,

7:79. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary,
both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

7:80. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

7:81. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
holocaust:

7:82. And a buck goat for sin:

7:83. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
buck goats, five lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Ahira the
son of Enan.

7:84. These were the offerings made by the princes of Israel in the
dedication of the altar, in the day wherein it was consecrated. Twelve
dishes of silver: twelve silver bowls: twelve little mortars of gold:

7:85. Each dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles of silver, and each
bowl seventy sicles: that is, putting all the vessels of silver
together, two thousand four hundred sicles, by the weight of the
sanctuary.

7:86. Twelve little mortars of gold full of incense, weighing ten sicles
apiece, by the weight of the sanctuary: that is, in all a hundred and
twenty sicles of gold.

7:87. Twelve oxen out of the herd for a holocaust, twelve rams, twelve
lambs of a year old, and their libations: twelve buck goats for sin.

7:88. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, oxen twenty-four, rams
sixty, buck goats sixty, lambs of a year old sixty. These things were
offered in the dedication of the altar, when it was anointed.

7:89. And when Moses entered into the tabernacle of the covenant, to
consult the oracle, he heard the voice of one speaking to him from the
propitiatory, that is over the ark between the two cherubims, and from
this place he spoke to him.

Numbers Chapter 8


The seven lamps are placed on the golden candlestick, to shine towards
the loaves of proposition: the ordination of the Levites: and to what
age they shall serve in the tabernacle.

8:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

8:2. Speak to Aaron, and thou shalt say to him: When thou shalt place
the seven lamps, let the candlestick be set up on the south side. Give
orders therefore that the lamps look over against the north, towards the
table of the loaves of proposition, over against that part shall they
give light, towards which the candlestick looketh.

8:3. And Aaron did so, and he put the lamps upon the candlestick, as the
Lord had commanded Moses.

8:4. Now this was the work of the candlestick, it was of beaten gold,
both the shaft in the middle, and all that came out of both sides of the
branches: according to the pattern which the Lord had shewn to Moses, so
he made the candlestick.

8:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

8:6. Take the Levites out of the midst of the children of Israel, and
thou shalt purify them,

8:7. According to this rite: Let them be sprinkled with the water of
purification, and let them shave all the hairs of their flesh. And when
they shall have washed their garments, and are cleansed,

Let them be sprinkled with the water of purification... This was the
holy water mixed with the ashes of the red cow, Num. 19., appointed for
purifying all that were unclean. It was a figure of the blood of Christ,
applied to our souls by his holy sacraments.

8:8. They shall take an ox of the herd, and for the offering thereof
fine flour tempered with oil: and thou shalt take another ox of the herd
for a sin offering:

8:9. And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
covenant, calling together all the multitude of the children of Israel:

8:10. And when the Levites are before the Lord, the children of Israel
shall put their hands upon them:

8:11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites, as a gift in the sight of the
Lord from the children of Israel, that they may serve in his ministry.

8:12. The Levites also shall put their hands upon the heads of the oxen,
of which thou shalt sacrifice one for sin, and the other for a holocaust
to the Lord, to pray for them.

8:13. And thou shalt set the Levites in the sight of Aaron and of his,
and shalt consecrate them being offered to the Lord,

8:14. And shalt separate them from the midst of the children of Israel,
to be mine.

8:15. And afterwards they shall enter into the tabernacle of the
covenant, to serve me. And thus shalt thou purify and consecrate them
for an oblation of the Lord: for as a gift they were given me by the
children of Israel.

8:16. I have taken them instead of the firstborn that open every womb in
Israel,

8:17. For all the firstborn of the children of Israel, both of men and
of beasts, are mine. From the day that I slew every firstborn in the
land of Egypt, have I sanctified them to myself:

8:18. And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children
of Israel:

8:19. And have delivered them for a gift to Aaron and his sons out of
the midst of the people, to serve me for Israel in the tabernacle of the
covenant, and to pray for them, lest there should be a plague among the
people, if they should presume to approach unto my sanctuary.

8:20. And Moses and Aaron and all the multitude of the children of
Israel did with the Levites all that the Lord had commanded Moses:

8:21. And they were purified, and washed their garments. And Aaron
lifted them up in the sight of the Lord, and prayed for them,

8:22. That being purified they might go into the tabernacle of the
covenant to do their services before Aaron and his sons. As the Lord had
commanded Moses touching the Levites, so was it done.

8:23. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

8:24. This is the law of the Levites: From twenty-five years old and
upwards, they shall go in to minister in the tabernacle of the covenant.

8:25. And when they shall have accomplished the fiftieth year of their
age, they shall cease to serve:

8:26. And they shall be the ministers of their brethren in the
tabernacle of the covenant, to keep the things that are committed to
their care, but not to do the works. Thus shalt thou order the Levites
touching their charge.

Numbers Chapter 9

The precept of the pasch is renewed: the unclean and travellers are to
observe it the second month: the camp is guided by the pillar of the
cloud.

9:1. The Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai, the second year
after they were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first month,
saying:

9:2. Let the children of Israel make the phase in its due time,

Make the phase... That is, keep the paschal solemnity, and eat the
paschal lamb.

9:3. The fourteenth day of this month in the evening, according to all
the ceremonies and justifications thereof.

9:4. And Moses commanded the children of Israel that they should make
the phase.

9:5. And they made it in its proper time: the fourteenth day of the
month at evening, in mount Sinai. The children of Israel did according
to all things that the Lord had commanded Moses.

9:6. But behold some who were unclean by occasion of the soul of a man,
who could not make the phase on that day, coming to Moses and Aaron,

Behold some who were unclean by occasion of the soul of a man, etc...
That is, by having touched or come near a dead body, out of which the
soul was departed.

9:7. Said to them: We are unclean by occasion of the soul of a man. Why
are we kept back that we may not offer in its season the offering to the
Lord among the children of Israel?

9:8. And Moses answered them: Stay that I may consult the Lord what he
will ordain concerning you.

9:9. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

9:10. Say to the children of Israel: The man that shall be unclean by
occasion of one that is dead, or shall be in a journey afar off in your
nation, let him make the phase to the Lord.

9:11. In the second month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the
evening, they shall eat it with unleavened bread and wild lettuce:

9:12. They shall not leave any thing thereof until morning, nor break a
bone thereof, they shall observe all the ceremonies of the phase.

9:13. But if any man is clean, and was not on a journey, and did not
make the phase, that soul shall be cut off from among his people,
because he offered not sacrifice to the Lord in due season: he shall
bear his sin.

9:14. The sojourner also and the stranger if they be among you, shall
make the phase to the Lord according to the ceremonies and
justifications thereof. The same ordinances shall be with you both for
the stranger, and for him that was born in the land.

9:15. Now on the day that the tabernacle was reared up, a cloud covered
it. But from the evening there was over the tabernacle, as it were, the
appearance of fire until the morning.

9:16. So it was always: by day the cloud covered it, and by night as it
were the appearance of fire.

9:17. And when the cloud that covered the tabernacle was taken up, then
the children of Israel marched forward: and in the place where the cloud
stood still, there they camped.

9:18. At the commandment of the Lord they marched, and at his
commandment they pitched the tabernacle. All the days that the cloud
abode over the tabernacle, they remained in the same place:

9:19. And if it was so that it continued over it a long time, the
children of Israel kept the watches of the Lord, and marched not,

9:20. For as many days soever as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle.
At the commandment of the Lord they pitched their tents, and at his
commandment they took them down.

9:21. If the cloud tarried from evening until morning, and immediately
at break of day left the tabernacle, they marched forward: and if it
departed after a day and a night, they took down their tents.

9:22. But if it remained over the tabernacle for two days or a month or
a longer time, the children of Israel remained in the same place, and
marched not: but immediately as soon as it departed, they removed the
camp.

9:23. By the word of the Lord they pitched their tents, and by his word
they marched: and kept the watches of the Lord according to his
commandment by the hand of Moses.

Numbers Chapter 10

The silver trumpets and their use. They march from Sinai.

10:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

10:2. Make thee two trumpets of beaten silver, wherewith thou mayest
call together the multitude when the camp is to be removed.

10:3. And when thou shalt sound the trumpets, all the multitude shall
gather unto thee to the door of the tabernacle of the covenant.

10:4. If thou sound but once, the princes and the heads of the multitude
of Israel shall come to thee.

10:5. But if the sound of the trumpets be longer, and with
interruptions, they that are on the east side, shall first go forward.

10:6. And at the second sounding and like noise of the trumpet, they who
lie on the south side shall take up their tents. And after this manner
shall the rest do, when the trumpets shall sound for a march.

10:7. But when the people is to be gathered together, the sound of the
trumpets shall be plain, and they shall not make a broken sound.

10:8. And the sons of Aaron the priest shall sound the trumpets: and
this shall be an ordinance for ever in your generations.

10:9. If you go forth to war out of your land against the enemies that
fight against you, you shall sound aloud with the trumpets, and there
shall be a remembrance of you before the Lord your God, that you may be
delivered out of the hands of your enemies.

10:10. If at any time you shall have a banquet, and on your festival
days, and on the first days of your months, you shall sound the trumpets
over the holocausts, and the sacrifices of peace offerings, that they
may be to you for a remembrance of your God. I am the Lord your God.

10:11. The second year, in the second month, the twentieth day of the
month, the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle of the covenant.

10:12. And the children of Israel marched by their troops from the
desert of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Pharan.

10:13. And the first went forward according to the commandment of the
Lord by the hand of Moses.

10:14. The sons of Juda by their troops: whose prince was Nahasson the
son of Aminadab.

10:15. In the tribe of the sons of Issachar, the prince was Nathanael
the son of Suar.

10:16. In the tribe of Zabulon, the prince was Eliab the son of Helon.

10:17. And the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gerson and
Merari set forward, bearing it.

10:18. And the sons of Ruben also marched, by their troops and ranks,
whose prince was Helisur the son of Sedeur.

10:19. And in the tribe of Simeon, the prince was Salamiel the son of
Surisaddai.

10:20. And in the tribe of Gad, the prince was Eliasaph the son of Duel.

10:21. Then the Caathites also marched carrying the sanctuary. So long
was the tabernacle carried, till they came to the place of setting it
up.

10:22. The sons of Ephraim also moved their camp by their troops, in
whose army the prince was Elisama the son of Ammiud.

10:23. And in the tribe of the sons of Manasses, the prince was Gamaliel
the son of Phadassur.

10:24. And in the tribe of Benjamin, the prince was Abidan the son of
Gedeon.

10:25. The last of all the camp marched the sons of Dan by their troops,
in whose army the prince was Ahiezer the son of Ammisaddai.

10:26. And in the tribe of the sons of Aser, the prince was Phegiel the
son of Ochran.

10:27. And in the tribe of the sons of Nephtali, the prince was Ahira
the son of Enan.

10:28. This was the order of the camps, and marches of the children of
Israel by their troops, when they set forward.

10:29. And Moses said to Hobab the son of Raguel the Madianite, his
kinsman: We are going towards the place which the Lord will give us:
come with us, that we may do thee good: for the Lord hath promised good
things to Israel.

10:30. But he answered him: I will not go with thee, but I will return
to my country, wherein I was born.

10:31. And he said: Do not leave us: for thou knowest in what places we
should encamp in the wilderness, and thou shalt be our guide.

10:32. And if thou comest with us, we will give thee what is the best of
the riches which the Lord shall deliver to us.

10:33. So they marched from the mount of the Lord three days' journey,
and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them, for three days
providing a place for the camp.

10:34. The cloud also of the Lord was over them by day when they
marched.

10:35. And when the ark was lifted up, Moses said: Arise, O Lord, and
let thy enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee from
before thy face.

10:36. And when it was set down, he said: Return, O Lord, to the
multitude of the host of Israel.

Numbers Chapter 11

The people murmur and are punished with fire. God appointeth seventy
ancients for assistants to Moses. They prophesy. The people have their
fill of flesh, but forthwith many die of the plague.

11:1. In the mean time there arose a murmuring of the people against the
Lord, as it were repining at their fatigue. And when the Lord heard it
he was angry. And the fire of the Lord being kindled against them,
devoured them that were at the uttermost part of the camp.

11:2. And when the people cried to Moses, Moses prayed to the Lord, and
the fire was swallowed up.

11:3. And he called the name of that place, The burning: for that the
fire of the Lord had been kindled against them.

The burning... Hebrew, Taberah.

11:4. For a mixt multitude of people, that came up with them, burned
with desire, sitting and weeping, the children of Israel also being
joined with them, and said: Who shall give us flesh to eat?

A mixt multitude... These were people that came with them out of Egypt,
who were not of the race of Israel; who, by their murmuring, drew also
the children of Israel to murmur: this should teach us the danger of
associating ourselves with the children of Egypt, that is, with the
lovers and admirers of this wicked world.

11:5. We remember the fish that we ate in Egypt free cost: the cucumbers
come into our mind, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and
the garlic.

11:6. Our soul is dry, our eyes behold nothing else but manna.

11:7. Now the manna was like coriander seed, of the colour of bdellium.

Bdellium... Bdellium, according to Pliny, 1.21, c. 9. was of the colour
of a man's nail, white and bright.

11:8. And the people went about, and gathering it, ground it in a mill,
or beat it in a mortar, and boiled it in a pot, and made cakes thereof
of the taste of bread tempered with oil.

11:9. And when the dew fell in the night upon the camp, the manna also
fell with it.

11:10. Now Moses heard the people weeping by their families, every one
at the door of his tent. And the wrath of the Lord was exceedingly
enkindled: to Moses also the thing seemed insupportable.

11:11. And he said to the Lord: Why hast thou afflicted thy servant?
Wherefore do I not find favour before thee? And why hast thou laid the
weight of all this people upon me?

11:12. Have I conceived all this multitude, or begotten them, that thou
shouldst say to me: Carry them in thy bosom as the nurse is wont to
carry the little infant, and bear them into the land, for which thou
hast sworn to their fathers?

11:13. Whence should I have flesh to give to so great a multitude? They
weep against me, saying: Give us flesh that we may eat.

11:14. I am not able alone to bear all this people, because it is too
heavy for me.

11:15. But if it seem unto thee otherwise, I beseech thee to kill me,
and let me find grace in thy eyes, that I be not afflicted with so great
evils.

11:16. And the Lord said to Moses: Gather unto me seventy men of the
ancients of Israel, whom thou knowest to be ancients and masters of the
people: and thou shalt bring them to the door of the tabernacle of the
covenant, and shalt make them stand there with thee,

Seventy men... This was the first institution of the council or senate,
called the Sanhedrin, consisting of seventy or seventy-two senators or
counsellors.

11:17. That I may come down and speak with thee: and I will take of thy
spirit, and will give to them, that they may bear with thee the burden
of the people, and thou mayest not be burthened alone.

11:18. And thou shalt say to the people: Be ye sanctified: to morrow you
shall eat flesh: for I have heard you say: Who will give us flesh to
eat? It was well with us in Egypt. That the Lord may give you flesh, and
you may eat:

11:19. Not for one day, nor two, nor five, nor ten, no nor for twenty.

11:20. But even for a month of days, till it come out at your nostrils,
and become loathsome to you, because you have cast off the Lord, who is
in the midst of you, and have wept before him, saying: Why came we out
of Egypt?

11:21. And Moses said: There are six hundred thousand footmen of this
people, and sayest thou: I will give them flesh to eat a whole month?

11:22. Shall then a multitude of sheep and oxen be killed, that it may
suffice for their food? or shall the fishes of the sea be gathered
together to fill them?

11:23. And the Lord answered him: Is the hand of the Lord unable? Thou
shalt presently see whether my word shall come to pass or no.

11:24. Moses therefore came, and told the people the words of the Lord,
and assembled seventy men of the ancients of Israel, and made them to
stand about the tabernacle.

11:25. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spoke to him, taking away
of the spirit that was in Moses, and giving to the seventy men. And when
the spirit had rested on them they prophesied, nor did they cease
afterwards.

11:26. Now there remained in the camp two of the men, of whom one was
called Eldad, and the other Medad, upon whom the spirit rested; for they
also had been enrolled, but were not gone forth to the tabernacle.

11:27. And when they prophesied in the camp, there ran a young man, and
told Moses, saying: Eldad and Medad prophesy in the camp.

11:28. Forthwith Josue the son of Nun, the minister of Moses, and chosen
out of many, said: My lord Moses forbid them.

11:29. But he said: Why hast thou emulation for me? O that all the
people might prophesy, and that the Lord would give them his spirit!

11:30. And Moses returned, with the ancients of Israel, into the camp.

11:31. And a wind going out from the Lord, taking quails up beyond the
sea brought them, and cast them into the camp for the space of one day's
journey, on every side of the camp round about, and they flew in the air
two cubits high above the ground.

11:32. The people therefore rising up all that day, and night, and the
next day, gathered together of quails, he that did least, ten cores: and
they dried them round about the camp.

11:33. As yet the flesh was between their teeth, neither had that kind
of meat failed: when behold the wrath of the Lord being provoked against
the people, struck them with an exceeding great plague.

11:34. And that place was called, The graves of lust: for there they
buried the people that had lusted. And departing from the graves of
lust, they came unto Haseroth, and abode there.

The graves of lust... Or, the sepulchres of concupiscence: so called
from their irregular desire of flesh. In Hebrew, Kibroth. Hattaavah.

Numbers Chapter 12

Mary and Aaron murmur against Moses, whom God praiseth above other
prophets. Mary being struck with leprosy, Aaron confesseth his fault.
Moses prayeth for her, and after seven days' separation from the camp,
she is restored.

12:1. And Mary and Aaron spoke against Moses, because of his wife the
Ethiopian,

Ethiopian... Sephora the wife of Moses was of Madian, which bordered
upon the land of Chus or Ethiopia: where note, that the Ethiopia here
spoken of is not that of Africa but that of Arabia.

12:2. And they said: Hath the Lord spoken by Moses only? Hath he not
also spoken to us in like manner? And when the Lord heard this,

12:3. (For Moses was a man exceeding meek above all men that dwelt upon
earth)

Exceeding meek... Moses being the meekest of men, would not contend for
himself; therefore, God inspired him to write here his own defence: and
the Holy Spirit, whose dictate he wrote, obliged him to declare the
truth, though it was so much to his own praise.

12:4. Immediately he spoke to him, and to Aaron and Mary: Come out you
three only to the tabernacle of the covenant. And when they were come
out,

12:5. The Lord came down in a pillar of the cloud, and stood in the
entry of the tabernacle calling to Aaron and Mary. And when they were
come,

12:6. He said to them: Hear my words: if there be among you a prophet of
the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to him in a
dream.

12:7. But it is not so with my servant Moses who is most faithful in all
my house:

12:8. For I speak to him mouth to mouth: and plainly, and not by riddles
and figures doth he see the Lord. Why then were you not afraid to speak
ill of my servant Moses?

12:9. And being angry with them he went away:

12:10. The cloud also that was over the tabernacle departed: and behold
Mary appeared white as snow with a leprosy. And when Aaron had looked on
her, and saw her all covered with leprosy,

12:11. He said to Moses: I beseech thee, my lord, lay not upon us this
sin, which we have foolishly committed:

12:12. Let her not be as one dead, and as an abortive that is cast forth
from the mother's womb. Lo, now one half of her flesh is consumed with
the leprosy.

12:13. And Moses cried to the Lord, saying O God, I beseech thee heal
her.

12:14. And the Lord answered him: If her father had spitten upon her
face, ought she not to have been ashamed for seven days at least? Let
her be separated seven days without the camp, and afterwards she shall
be called again.

12:15. Mary therefore was put out of the camp seven days: and the people
moved not from that place until Mary was called again.

Numbers Chapter 13

The twelve spies are sent to view the land. The relation they make of
it.

13:1. And the people marched from Haseroth, and pitched their tents in
the desert of Pharan.

13:2. And there the Lord spoke to Moses, saying.

13:3. Send men to view the land of Chanaan, which I will give to the
children of Israel, one of every tribe, of the rulers.

13:4. Moses did what the Lord had commanded, sending from the desert of
Pharan, principal men, whose names are these:

13:5. Of the tribe of Ruben, Sammua the son of Zechur.

13:6. Of the tribe of Simeon, Saphat the son of Huri.

13:7. Of the tribe of Juda, Caleb the son of Jephone.

13:8. Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.

13:9. Of the tribe of Ephraim, Osee the son of Nun.

13:10. Of the tribe of Benjamin, Phalti the son of Raphu.

13:11. Of the tribe of Zabulon, Geddiel the son of Sodi.

13:12. Of the tribe of Joseph, of the sceptre of Manasses, Gaddi the son
of Susi.

13:13. Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.

13:14. Of the tribe of Aser, Sthur the son of Michael.

13:15. Of the tribe of Nephtali, Nahabi the son of Vapsi.

13:16. Of the tribe of Gad, Guel the son of Machi.

13:17. These are the names of the men, whom Moses sent to view the land:
and he called Osee the son of Nun, Josue.

13:18. And Moses sent them to view the land of Chanaan, and said to
them: Go you up by the south side. And when you shall come to the
mountains,

13:19. View the land, of what sort it is, and the people that are the
inhabitants thereof, whether they be strong or weak: few in number or
many:

13:20. The land itself, whether it be good or bad: what manner of
cities, walled or without walls:

13:21. The ground, fat or barren, woody or without trees. Be of good
courage, and bring us of the fruits of the land. Now it was the time
when the firstripe grapes are fit to be eaten.

13:22. And when they were gone up, they viewed the land from the desert
of Sin, unto Rohob as you enter into Emath.

13:23. And they went up at the south side, and came to Hebron, where
were Achiman and Sisai and Tholmai the sons of Enac. For Hebron was
built seven years before Tanis the city of Egypt.

13:24. And forward as far as the torrent of the cluster of grapes, they
cut off a branch with its cluster of grapes, which two men carried upon
a lever. They took also of the pomegranates and of the figs of that
place:

13:25. Which was called Nehelescol, that is to say, the torrent of the
cluster of grapes, because from thence the children of Israel had
carried a cluster of grapes.

13:26. And they that went to spy out the land returned after forty days,
having gone round all the country,

13:27. And came to Moses and Aaron and to all the assembly of the
children of Israel to the desert of Pharan, which is in Cades. And
speaking to them and to all the multitude, they shewed them the fruits
of the land:

13:28. And they related and said: We came into the land to which thou
sentest us, which in very deed floweth with milk and honey as may be
known by these fruits:

13:29. But it hath very strong inhabitants, and the cities are great and
walled. We saw there the race of Enac.

13:30. Amalec dwelleth in the south, the Hethite and the Jebusite and
the Amorrhite in the mountains: but the Chanaanite abideth by the sea
and near the streams of the Jordan.

13:31. In the mean time Caleb, to still the murmuring of the people that
rose against Moses, said: Let us go up and possess the land, for we
shall be able to conquer it.

13:32. But the others, that had been with him, said: No, we are not able
to go up to this people, because they are stronger than we.

13:33. And they spoke ill of the land, which they had viewed, before the
children of Israel, saying: The land which we have viewed, devoureth its
inhabitants: the people, that we beheld are of a tall stature.

Spoke ill, etc... These men, who by their misrepresentations of the land
of promise, discouraged the Israelites from attempting the conquest of
it, were a figure of worldlings, who, by decrying or misrepresenting
true devotion, discourage Christians from seeking in earnest and
acquiring so great a good, and thereby securing to themselves a happy
eternity.

13:34. There we saw certain monsters of the sons of Enac, of the giant
kind: in comparison of whom, we seemed like locusts.

Numbers Chapter 14

The people murmur. God threateneth to destroy them. He is appeased by
Moses, yet so as to exclude the murmurers from entering the promised
land. The authors of the sedition are struck dead. The rest going to
fight against the will of God are beaten.

14:1. Therefore the whole multitude crying wept that night.

14:2. And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron,
saying:

14:3. Would God that we had died in Egypt: and would God we may die in
this vast wilderness, and that the Lord may not bring us into this land,
lest we fall by the sword, and our wives and children be led away
captives. Is it not better to return into Egypt?

14:4. And they said one to another: Let us appoint a captain, and let us
return into Egypt.

14:5. And when Moses and Aaron heard this, they fell down flat upon the
ground before the multitude of the children of Israel.

14:6. But Josue the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephone, who
themselves also had viewed the land, rent their garments,

14:7. And said to all the multitude of the children of Israel: The land
which we have gone round is very good:

14:8. If the Lord be favourable, he will bring us into it, and give us a
land flowing with milk and honey.

14:9. Be not rebellious against the Lord: and fear ye not the people of
this land, for we are able to eat them up as bread. All aid is gone from
them: the Lord is with us, fear ye not.

14:10. And when all the multitude cried out, and would have stoned them,
the glory of the Lord appeared over the tabernacle of the covenant to
all the children of Israel.

14:11. And the Lord said to Moses: How long will this people detract me?
how long will they not believe me for all the signs that I have wrought
before them?

14:12. I will strike them therefore with pestilence, and will consume
them: but thee I will make a ruler over a great nation, and a mightier
than this is.

14:13. And Moses said to the Lord: That the Egyptians, from the midst of
whom thou hast brought forth this people,

14:14. And the inhabitants of this land, (who have heard that thou, O
Lord, art among this people, and art seen face to face, and thy cloud
protecteth them, and thou goest before them in a pillar of a cloud by
day, and in a pillar of fire by night,)

14:15. May hear that thou hast killed so great a multitude as it were
one man and may say:

14:16. He could not bring the people into the land for which he had
sworn, therefore did he kill them in the wilderness.

14:17. Let then the strength of the Lord be magnified, as thou hast
sworn, saying:

14:18. The Lord is patient and full of mercy, by taking away iniquity
and wickedness, and leaving no man clear, who visitest the sins of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.

Clear... i. e., who deserves punishment.

14:19. Forgive, I beseech thee, the sins of this people, according to
the greatness of thy mercy, as thou hast been merciful to them from
their going out of Egypt unto this place.

14:20. And the Lord said: I have forgiven according to thy word.

14:21. As I live: and the whole earth shall be filled with the glory of
the Lord.

14:22. But yet all the men that have seen my majesty, and the signs that
I have done in Egypt, and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now ten
times, and have not obeyed my voice,

14:23. Shall not see the land for which I swore to their fathers,
neither shall any one of them that hath detracted me behold it.

14:24. My servant Caleb, who being full of another spirit hath followed
me, I will bring into this land which he hath gone round: and his seed
shall possess it.

14:25. For the Amalecite and the Chanaanite dwell in the valleys. To
morrow remove the camp, and return into the wilderness by the way of the
Red Sea.

14:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

14:27. How long doth this wicked multitude murmur against me? I have
heard the murmurings of the children of Israel.

14:28. Say therefore to them: As I live, saith the Lord: According as
you have spoken in my hearing, so will I do to you.

14:29. In the wilderness shall your carcasses lie. All you that were
numbered from twenty years old and upward, and have murmured against me,

14:30. Shall not enter into the land, over which I lifted up my hand to
make you dwell therein, except Caleb the son of Jephone, and Josue the
son of Nun.

14:31. But your children, of whom you said, that they should be a prey
to the enemies, will I bring in: that they may see the land which you
have despised.

14:32. Your carcasses shall lie in the wilderness.

14:33. Your children shall wander in the desert forty years, and shall
bear your fornication, until the carcasses of their fathers be consumed
in the desert,

Shall bear your fornication... That is, shall bear the punishment of
your disloyalty to God, which in the scripture language is here called a
fornication, in a spiritual sense.

14:34. According to the number of the forty days, wherein you viewed the
land: a year shall be counted for a day. And forty years you shall
receive your iniquities, and shall know my revenge:

14:35. For as I have spoken, so will I do to all this wicked multitude,
that hath risen up together against me: in this wilderness shall it
faint away and die.

14:36. Therefore all the men, whom Moses had sent to view the land, and
who at their return had made the whole multitude to murmur against him,
speaking ill of the land that it was naught,

14:37. Died and were struck in the sight of the Lord.

14:38. But Josue the son of Nun, and Caleb had gone to view the land.

14:39. And Moses spoke all these words to all the children of Israel,
and the people mourned exceedingly.

14:40. And behold rising up very early in the morning, they went up to
the top of the mountain, and said: We are ready to go up to the place,
of which the Lord hath spoken: for we have sinned.

14:41. And Moses said to them: Why transgress you the word of the Lord,
which shall not succeed prosperously with you?

14:42. Go not up, for the Lord is not with you: lest you fall before
your enemies.

14:43. The Amalecite and the Chanaanite are before you, and by their
sword you shall fall, because you would not consent to the Lord, neither
will the Lord be with you.

14:44. But they being blinded went up to the top of the mountain. But
the ark of the testament of the Lord and Moses departed not from the
camp.

14:45. And the Amalecite came down, and the Chanaanite that dwelt in the
mountain: and smiting and slaying them pursued them as far as Horma.

Numbers Chapter 15

Certain laws concerning sacrifices. Sabbath breaking is punished with
death. The law of fringes on their garments.

15:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

15:2. Speak to the children of Israel and thou shalt say to them: When
you shall be come unto the land of your habitation, which I will give
you,

15:3. And shall make an offering to the Lord, for a holocaust, or a
victim, paying your vows, or voluntarily offering gifts, or in your
solemnities burning a sweet savour unto the Lord, of oxen or of sheep:

15:4. Whosoever immolateth the victim, shall offer a sacrifice of fine
flour, the tenth part of an ephi, tempered with the fourth part of a hin
of oil:

15:5. And he shall give the same measure of wine to pour out in
libations for the holocaust or for the victim. For every lamb,

15:6. And for every ram there shall be a sacrifice of flour of two
tenths, which shall be tempered with the third part of a hin of oil:

15:7. And he shall offer the third part the same measure of wine for the
libation, for a sweet savour to the Lord.

15:8. But when thou offerest a holocaust or sacrifice of oxen, to fulfil
thy vow or for victims of peace offerings,

15:9. Thou shalt give for every ox three tenths of flour tempered with
half a hin of oil,

15:10. And wine for libations of the same measure, for an offering of
most sweet savour to the Lord.

15:11. Thus shalt thou do

15:12. For every ox and ram and lamb and kid.

15:13. Both they that are born in the land, and the strangers

15:14. Shall offer sacrifices after the same rite.

15:15. There shall be all one law and judgment both for you and for them
who are strangers in the land.

15:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

15:17. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:

15:18. When you are come into the land which I will give you,

15:19. And shall eat of the bread of that country, you shall separate
firstfruits to the Lord,

15:20. Of the things you eat. As you separate firstfruits of your
barnfloors:

15:21. So also shall you give firstfruits of your dough to the Lord.

15:22. And if through ignorance you omit any of these things, which the
Lord hath spoken to Moses,

15:23. And by him hath commanded you from the day that he began to
command and thenceforward,

15:24. And the multitude have forgotten to do it: they shall offer a
calf out of the herd, a holocaust for a most sweet savour to the Lord,
and the sacrifice and libations thereof, as the ceremonies require, and
a buck goat for sin:

15:25. And the priest shall pray for all the multitude of the children
of Israel: and it shall be forgiven them, because they sinned
ignorantly, offering notwithstanding a burnt offering to the Lord for
themselves and for their sin and their Ignorance:

15:26. And it shall be forgiven all the people of the children of
Israel: and the strangers that sojourn among them: because it is the
fault of all the people through ignorance.

15:27. But if one soul shall sin ignorantly, he shall offer a she-goat
of a year old for his sin.

15:28. And the priest shall pray for him, because he sinned ignorantly
before the Lord: and he shall obtain his pardon, and it shall be
forgiven him.

15:29. The same law shall be for all that sin by ignorance, whether they
be natives or strangers.

15:30. But the soul that committeth any thing through pride, whether he
be born in the land or a stranger (because he hath been rebellious
against the Lord) shall be cut off from among his people:

15:31. For he hath contemned the word of the Lord, and made void his
precept: therefore shall he be destroyed, and shall bear his iniquity.

15:32. And it came to pass, when the children of Israel were in the
wilderness, and had found a man gathering sticks on the sabbath day,

15:33. That they brought him to Moses and Aaron and the whole multitude.

15:34. And they put him into prison, not knowing what they should do
with him.

15:35. And the Lord said to Moses: Let that man die, let all the
multitude stone him without the camp.

15:36. And when they had brought him out, they stoned him, and he died
as the Lord had commanded.

15:37. The Lord also said to Moses:

15:38. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt tell them to make
to themselves fringes in the corners of their garments, putting in them
ribands of blue:

Fringes... The Pharisees enlarged these fringes through hypocrisy, Matt.
23.5, to appear more zealous than other men for the law of God.

15:39. That when they shall see them, they may remember all the
commandments of the Lord, and not follow their own thoughts and eyes
going astray after divers things,

15:40. But rather being mindful of the precepts of the Lord, may do them
and be holy to their God.

15:41. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
that I might be your God.

Numbers Chapter 16

The schism of Core and his adherents: their punishment.

16:1. And behold Core the son of Isaar, the son of Caath, the son of
Levi, and Dathan and Abiron the sons of Eliab, and Hon the son of
Pheleth of the children of Ruben,

16:2. Rose up against Moses, and with them two hundred and fifty others
of the children of Israel, leading men of the synagogue, and who in the
time of assembly were called by name.

Rose up... The crime of these men, which was punished in so remarkable a
manner, was that of schism, and of rebellion against the authority
established by God in the church; and their pretending to the priesthood
without being lawfully called and sent: the same is the case of all
modern sectaries.

16:3. And when they had stood up against Moses and Aaron, they said: Let
it be enough for you, that all the multitude consisteth of holy ones,
and the Lord is among them: Why lift you up yourselves above the people
of the Lord?

16:4. When Moses heard this, he fell flat on his face:

16:5. And speaking to Core and all the multitude, he said: In the
morning the Lord will make known who belong to him, and the holy he will
join to himself: and whom he shall choose, they shall approach to him.

16:6. Do this therefore: Take every man of you your censers, thou Core,
and all thy company.

16:7. And putting fire in them to morrow, put incense upon it before the
Lord: and whomsoever he shall choose, the same shall be holy: you take
too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

16:8. And he said again to Core: Hear ye sons of Levi.

16:9. Is it a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath spared
you from all the people, and joined you to himself, that you should
serve him in the service of the tabernacle, and should stand before the
congregation of the people, and should minister to him?

16:10. Did he therefore make thee and all thy brethren the sons of Levi
to approach unto him, that you should challenge to yourselves the
priesthood also,

16:11. And that all thy company should stand against the Lord? for what
is Aaron that you murmur against him?

16:12. Then Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiron the sons of Eliab. But
they answered: We will not come.

16:13. Is it a small matter to thee, that thou hast brought us out of a
land that flowed with milk and honey, to kill us in the desert, except
thou rule also like a lord over us?

16:14. Thou hast brought us indeed into a land that floweth with rivers
of milk and honey, and hast given us possessions of fields and
vineyards; wilt thou also pull out our eyes? We will not come.

16:15. Moses therefore being very angry, said to the Lord: Respect not
their sacrifices: thou knowest that I have not taken of them so much as
a young ass at any time, nor have injured any of them.

Very angry... This anger was a zeal against sin; and an indignation at
the affront offered to God; like that which the same holy prophet
conceived upon the sight of the golden calf, Ex. 32.19.

16:16. And he said to Core: Do thou and thy congregation stand apart
before the Lord to morrow, and Aaron apart.

16:17. Take every one of you censers, and put incense upon them,
offering to the Lord two hundred and fifty censers: let Aaron also hold
his censer.

16:18. When they had done this, Moses and Aaron standing,

16:19. And had drawn up all the multitude against them to the door of
the tabernacle, the glory of the Lord appeared to them all.

16:20. And the Lord speaking to Moses and Aaron, said:

16:21. Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may
presently destroy them.

16:22. They fell flat on their face, and said: O most mighty, the God of
the spirits of all flesh, for one man's sin shall thy wrath rage against
all?

16:23. And the Lord said to Moses:

16:24. Command the whole people to separate themselves from the tents of
Core and Dathan and Abiron.

16:25. And Moses arose, and went to Dathan and Abiron: and the ancients
of Israel following him,

16:26. He said to the multitude: Depart from the tents of these wicked
men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest you be involved in their sins.

16:27. And when they were departed from their tents round about, Dathan
and Abiron coming out stood in the entry of their pavilions with their
wives and children, and all the people.

16:28. And Moses said: By this you shall know that the Lord hath sent me
to do all things that you see, and that I have not forged them of my own
head:

16:29. If these men die the common death of men, and if they be visited
with a plague, wherewith others also are wont to be visited, the Lord
did not send me.

16:30. But if the Lord do a new thing, and the earth opening her mouth
swallow them down, and all things that belong to them, and they go down
alive into hell, you shall know that they have blasphemed the Lord.

16:31. And immediately as he had made an end of speaking, the earth
broke asunder under their feet:

16:32. And opening her mouth, devoured them with their tents and all
their substance.

16:33. And they went down alive into hell, the ground closing upon them,
and they perished from among the people.

16:34. But all Israel, that was standing round about, fled at the cry of
them that were perishing: saying: Lest perhaps the earth swallow us up
also.

16:35. And a fire coming out from the Lord, destroyed the two hundred
and fifty men that offered the incense.

16:36. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

16:37. Command Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest to take up the
censers that lie in the burning, and to scatter the fire of one side and
the other: because they are sanctified

16:38. In the deaths of the sinners: and let him beat them into plates,
and fasten them to the altar, because incense hath been offered in them
to the Lord, and they are sanctified, that the children of Israel may
see them for a sign and a memorial.

16:39. Then Eleazar the priest took the brazen censers, wherein they had
offered, whom the burning fire had devoured, and beat them into plates,
fastening them to the altar:

16:40. That the children of Israel might have for the time to come
wherewith they should be admonished, that no stranger or any one that is
not of the seed of Aaron should come near to offer incense to the Lord,
lest he should suffer as Core suffered, and all his congregation,
according as the Lord spoke to Moses.

16:41. The following day all the multitude of the children of Israel
murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying: You have killed the people of
the Lord.

16:42. And when there arose a sedition, and the tumult increased,

16:43. Moses and Aaron fled to the tabernacle of the covenant. And when
they were gone into it, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord
appeared.

16:44. And the Lord said to Moses:

16:45. Get you out from the midst of this multitude, this moment will I
destroy them. And as they were lying on the ground,

16:46. Moses said to Aaron: Take the censer, and putting fire in it from
the altar, put incense upon it, and go quickly to the people to pray for
them: for already wrath is gone out from the Lord, and the plague
rageth.

16:47. When Aaron had done this, and had run to the midst of the
multitude which the burning fire was now destroying, he offered the
incense:

16:48. And standing between the dead and the living, he prayed for the
people, and the plague ceased.

16:49. And the number of them that were slain was fourteen thousand and
seven hundred men, besides them that had perished in the sedition of
Core.

16:50. And Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the tabernacle of the
covenant after the destruction was over.

Numbers Chapter 17

The priesthood is confirmed to Aaron by the miracle of the blooming of
his rod, which is kept for a monument in the tabernacle.

17:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

17:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a
rod by their kindreds, of all the princes of the tribes, twelve rods,
and write the name of every man upon his rod.

17:3. And the name of Aaron shall be for the tribe of Levi, and one rod
shall contain all their families:

17:4. And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the covenant
before the testimony, where I will speak to thee.

17:5. Whomsoever of these I shall choose, his rod shall blossom: and I
will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel,
wherewith they murmur against you.

17:6. And Moses spoke to the children of Israel: and all the princes
gave him rods one for every tribe: and there were twelve rods besides
the rod of Aaron.

17:7. And when Moses had Laid them up before the Lord in the tabernacle
of the testimony:

17:8. He returned on the following day, and found that the rod of Aaron
for the house of Levi, was budded: and that the buds swelling it hid
bloomed blossoms, which spreading the leaves, were formed into almonds.

The rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was budded, etc... This rod of
Aaron which thus miraculously brought forth fruit, was a figure of the
blessed Virgin conceiving and bringing forth her Son without any
prejudice to her virginity.

17:9. Moses therefore brought out all the rods from before the Lord to
all the children of Israel: and they saw, and every one received their
rods.

17:10. And the Lord said to Moses: Carry back the rod of Aaron into the
tabernacle of the testimony, that it may be kept there for a token of
the rebellious children of Israel, and that their complaints may cease
from me lest they die.

17:11. And Moses did as the Lord had commanded.

17:12. And the children of Israel said to Moses: Behold we are consumed,
we all perish.

17:13. Whosoever approacheth to the tabernacle of the Lord, he dieth.
Are we all to a man to be utterly destroyed?

Numbers Chapter 18

The charge of the priests and of the Levites, and their portion.

18:1. And the Lord said to Aaron: Thou, and thy sons, and thy father's
house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and
thy sons with thee shall bear the sins of your priesthood.

Thou, and thy father's house with thee, shall bear the iniquity of the
sanctuary... That is, you shall be punished if, through negligence or
want of due attention, you err in the discharge of the sacred functions
for which you were ordained.

18:2. And take with thee thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, and the
sceptre of thy father, and let them be ready in hand, and minister to
thee: but thou and thy sons shall minister in the tabernacle of the
testimony.

18:3. And the Levites shall watch to do thy commands, and about all the
works of the tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of
the sanctuary nor the altar, lest both they die, and you also perish
with them.

18:4. But let them be with thee, and watch in the charge of the
tabernacle, and in all the ceremonies thereof. A stranger shall not join
himself with you.

18:5. Watch ye in the charge of the sanctuary, and in the ministry of
the altar: lest indignation rise upon the children of Israel.

18:6. I have given you your brethren the Levites from among the children
of Israel, and have delivered them for a gift to the Lord, to serve in
the ministries of the tabernacle.

18:7. But thou and thy sons look ye to the priesthood: and all things
that pertain to the service of the altar, and that are within the veil,
shall be executed by the priests. If any stranger shall approach, he
shall be slain.

18:8. And the Lord said to Aaron: Behold I have given thee the charge of
my firstfruits. All things that are sanctified by the children of
Israel, I have delivered to thee and to thy sons for the priestly
office, by everlasting ordinances.

18:9. These therefore shalt thou take of the things that are sanctified,
and are offered to the Lord. Every offering, and sacrifice, and
whatsoever is rendered to me for sin and for trespass, and becometh holy
of holies, shall be for thee and thy sons.

18:10. Thou shalt eat it in the sanctuary: the males only shall eat
thereof, because it is a consecrated thing to thee.

18:11. But the firstfruits, which the children of Israel shall vow and
offer, I have given to thee, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters, by a
perpetual law. He that is clean in thy house, shall eat them.

18:12. All the best of the oil, and of the wine, and of the corn,
whatsoever firstfruits they offer to the Lord, I have given them to
thee.

18:13. All the firstripe of the fruits, that the ground bringeth forth,
and which are brought to the Lord, shall be for thy use: he that is
clean in thy house, shall eat them.

18:14. Every thing that the children of Israel shall give by vow, shall
be thine.

18:15. Whatsoever is firstborn of all flesh, which they offer to the
Lord, whether it be of men, or of beasts, shall belong to thee: only for
the firstborn of man thou shalt take a price, and every beast that is
unclean thou shalt cause to be redeemed,

18:16. And the redemption of it shall be after one month, for five
sicles of silver, by the weight of the sanctuary. A sicle hath twenty
obols.

18:17. But the firstling of a cow, and of a sheep and of a goat thou
shalt not cause to be redeemed, because they are sanctified to the Lord.
Their blood only thou shalt pour upon the altar, and their fat thou
shalt burn for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

18:18. But the flesh shall fall to thy use, as the consecrated breast,
and the right shoulder shall be thine.

18:19. All the firstfruits of the sanctuary which the children of Israel
offer to the Lord, I have given to thee and to thy sons and daughters,
by a perpetual ordinance. It is a covenant of salt for ever before the
Lord, to thee and to thy sons.

A covenant of salt... It is a proverbial expression, signifying a
covenant not to be altered or corrupted; as salt is used to keep things
from corruption; a covenant perpetual, like that by which it was
appointed, that salt should be used in every sacrifice. Lev. 2.

18:20. And the Lord said to Aaron: You shall possess nothing in their
land, neither shall you have a portion among them: I am thy portion and
inheritance in the midst of the children of Israel.

18:21. And I have given to the sons of Levi all the tithes of Israel for
a possession, for the ministry wherewith they serve me in the tabernacle
of the covenant:

18:22. That the children of Israel may not approach any more to the
tabernacle, nor commit deadly sin,

Deadly sin... That is, sin which will bring death after it.

18:23. But only the sons of Levi may serve me in the tabernacle, and
bear the sins of the people. It shall be an everlasting ordinance in
your generations. They shall not possess any other thing,

18:24. But be content with the oblation or tithes, which I have
separated for their uses and necessities.

18:25. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

18:26. Command the Levites, and declare unto them: When you shall
receive of the children of Israel the tithes, which I have given you,
offer the firstfruits of them to the Lord, that is to say, the tenth
part of the tenth:

18:27. That it may be reckoned to you as an oblation of firstfruits, as
well of the barnfloors as of the winepresses:

18:28. And of all the things of which you receive tithes, offer the
firstfruits to the Lord, and give them to Aaron the priest.

18:29. All the things that you shall offer of the tithes, and shall
separate for the gifts of the Lord, shall be the best and choicest
things.

18:30. And thou shalt say to them: If you offer all the goodly and the
better things of the tithes, it shall be reckoned to you as if you had
given the firstfruits of the barnfloor and the winepress:

18:31. And you shall eat them in all your places, both you and your
families: because it is your reward for the ministry, wherewith you
serve in the tabernacle of the testimony.

18:32. And you shall not sin in this point, by reserving the choicest
and fat things to yourselves, lest you profane the oblations of the
children of Israel, and die.

Numbers Chapter 19

The law of the sacrifice of the red cow, and the water of expiation.

19:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

19:2. This is the observance of the victim, which the Lord hath
ordained. Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee a
red cow of full age, in which there is no blemish, and which hath not
carried the yoke:

A red cow, etc... This red cow, offered in sacrifice for sin, and
consumed with fire without the camp, with the ashes of which, mingled
with water, the unclean were to be expiated and purified; was a figure
of the passion of Christ, by whose precious blood applied to our souls
in the holy sacraments, we are cleansed from our sins.

19:3. And you shall deliver her to Eleazar the priest, who shall bring
her forth without the camp, and shall immolate her in the sight of all:

19:4. And dipping his finger in her blood, shall sprinkle it over
against the door of the tabernacle seven times,

19:5. And shall burn her in the sight of all delivering up to the fire
her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, and her dung.

19:6. The priest shall also take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet
twice dyed, and cast it into the flame, with which the cow is consumed.

19:7. And then after washing his garments, and body, he shall enter into
the camp, and shall be unclean until the evening.

19:8. He also that hath burned her, shall wash his garments, and his
body, and shall be unclean until the evening.

19:9. And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the cow, and
shall pour them forth without the camp in a most clean place, that they
may be reserved for the multitude of the children of Israel, and for a
water of aspersion: because the cow was burnt for sin.

19:10. And when he that carried the ashes of the cow, hath washed his
garments, he shall be unclean until the evening. The children of Israel,
and the strangers that dwell among them, shall observe this for a holy
thing by a perpetual ordinance.

19:11. He that toucheth the corpse of a man, and is therefore unclean
seven days,

19:12. Shall be sprinkled with this water on the third day, and on the
seventh, and so shall be cleansed. If he were not sprinkled on the third
day, he cannot be cleansed on the seventh.

19:13. Every one that toucheth the corpse of a man, and is not sprinkled
with this mixture, shall profane the tabernacle of the Lord, and shall
perish out of Israel: because he was not sprinkled with the water of
expiation, he shall be unclean, and his uncleanness shall remain upon
him.

19:14. This is the law of a man that dieth in a tent: All that go into
his tent and all the vessels that are there, shall be unclean seven
days.

19:15. The vessel that hath no cover, nor binding over it, shall be
unclean.

19:16. If any man in the field touch the corpse of a man that was slain,
or that died of himself, or his bone, or his grave, he shall be unclean
seven days.

19:17. And they shall take of the ashes of the burning and of the sin
offering, and shall pour living waters upon them into a vessel.

19:18. And a man that is clean shall dip hyssop in them, and shall
sprinkle therewith all the tent, and all the furniture, and the men that
are defiled with touching any such thing:

19:19. And in this manner he that is clean shall purify the unclean on
the third and on the seventh day. And being expiated the seventh day, he
shall wash both himself and his garments, and be unclean until the
evening.

19:20. If any man be not expiated after this rite, his soul shall perish
out of the midst of the church: because he hath profaned the sanctuary
of the Lord, and was not sprinkled with the water of purification.

19:21. This precept shall be an ordinance for ever. He also that
sprinkled the water, shall wash his garments. Every one that shall touch
the waters of expiation, shall be unclean until the evening.

19:22. Whatsoever a person toucheth who is unclean, he shall make it
unclean: and the person that toucheth any of these things, shall be
unclean until the evening.

Numbers Chapter 20

The death of Mary the sister of Moses. The people murmur for want of
water: God giveth it them from the rock. The death of Aaron.

20:1. And the children of Israel, and all the multitude came into the
desert of Sin, in the first month: and the people abode in Cades. And
Mary died there, and was buried in the same place.

20:2. And the people wanting water, came together against Moses and
Aaron:

20:3. And making a sedition, they said: Would God we had perished among
our brethren before the Lord.

20:4. Why have you brought out the church of the Lord into the
wilderness, that both we and our cattle should die?

20:5. Why have you made us come up out of Egypt, and have brought us
into this wretched place which cannot be sowed, nor bringeth forth figs,
nor vines, nor pomegranates, neither is there any water to drink?

20:6. And Moses and Aaron leaving the multitude, went into the
tabernacle of the covenant, and fell flat upon the ground, and cried to
the Lord, and said. O Lord God, hear the cry of this people, and open to
them thy treasure, a fountain of living water, that being satisfied,
they may cease to murmur. And the glory of the Lord appeared over them.

20:7. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

20:8. Take the rod, and assemble the people together, thou and Aaron thy
brother, and speak to the rock before them, and it shall yield waters.
And when thou hast brought forth water out of the rock, all the
multitude and their cattle shall drink.

20:9. Moses therefore took the rod, which was before the Lord, as he had
commanded him,

20:10. And having gathered together the multitude before the rock, he
said to them: Hear, ye rebellious and incredulous: Can we bring you
forth water out of this rock?

20:11. And when Moses bad lifted up his hand, and struck the rock twice
with the rod, there came forth water in great abundance, so that the
people and their cattle drank,

The rock... This rock was a figure of Christ, and the water that issued
out from the rock, of his precious blood, the source of all our good.

20:12. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: Because you have not
believed me, to sanctify me before the children of Israel, you shall not
bring these people into the land, which I will give them.

You have not believed, etc... The fault of Moses and Aaron, on this
occasion, was a certain diffidence and weakness of faith; not doubting
of God's power or veracity; but apprehending the unworthiness of that
rebellious and incredulous people, and therefore speaking with some
ambiguity.

20:13. This is the Water of contradiction, where the children of Israel
strove with words against the Lord, and he was sanctified in them.

The Water of contradiction... Or strife. Hebrew, Meribah.

20:14. In the mean time Moses sent messengers from Cades to the king of
Edom, to say: Thus saith thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all the labour
that hath come upon us:

20:15. In what manner our fathers went down into Egypt, and there we
dwelt a long time, and the Egyptians afflicted us and our fathers.

20:16. And how we cried to the Lord, and he heard us, and sent an angel,
who hath brought us out of Egypt. Lo, we are now in the city of Cades,
which is in the uttermost of thy borders,

20:17. And we beseech thee that we may have leave to pass through thy
country. We will not go through the fields, nor through the vineyards,
we will not drink the waters of thy wells, but we will go by the common
highway, neither turning aside to the right hand, nor to the left, till
we are past thy borders.

20:18. And Edom answered them: Thou shalt not pass by me: if thou dost I
will come out armed against thee.

20:19. And the children of Israel said: We will go by the beaten way:
and if we and our cattle drink of thy waters, we will give thee what is
just: there shall be no difficulty in the price, only let us pass
speedily.

20:20. But he answered: Thou shalt not pass. And immediately he came
forth to meet them with an infinite multitude, and a strong hand,

20:21. Neither would he condescend to their desire to grant them passage
through his borders. Wherefore Israel turned another way from him.

20:22. And when they had removed the camp from Cades, they came to mount
Hor, which is in the borders of the land of Edom:

20:23. Where the Lord spoke to Moses:

20:24. Let Aaron, saith he, go to his people: for he shall not go into
the land which I have given the children of Israel, because he was
incredulous to my words, at the waters of contradiction.

20:25. Take Aaron and his son with him, and bring them up into mount
Hor:

20:26. And when thou hast stripped the father of his vesture, thou shalt
vest therewith Eleazar his son: Aaron shall be gathered to his people,
and die there.

20:27. Moses did as the Lord had commanded: and they went up into mount
Hor before all the multitude.

20:28. And when he had stripped Aaron of his vestments, he vested
Eleazar his son with them.

20:29. And Aaron being dead in the top of the mountain, he came down
with Eleazar.

20:30. And all the multitude seeing that Aaron was dead, mourned for him
thirty days throughout all their families.

Numbers Chapter 21

King Arad is overcome. The people murmur and are punished with fiery
serpents: they are healed by the brazen serpent. They conquer the kings
Sehon and Og.

21:1. And when king Arad the Chanaanite, who dwelt towards the south,
had heard this, to wit, that Israel was come by the way of the spies, he
fought against them, and overcoming them carried off their spoils.

21:2. But Israel binding himself by vow to the Lord, said: If thou wilt
deliver thus people into my hand, I will utterly destroy their cities.

21:3. And the Lord heard the prayers of Israel, and delivered up the
Chanaanite, and they cut them off and destroyed their cities: and they
called the name of that place Horma, that is to say, Anathema.

Anathema... That is, a thing devoted to utter destruction.

21:4. And they marched from mount Hor, by the way that leadeth to the
Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom. And the people began to be weary
of their journey and labour:

21:5. And speaking against God and Moses, they said: Why didst thou
bring us out of Egypt, to die in the wilderness? There is no bread, nor
have we any waters: our soul now loatheth this very light food.

Very light food... So they call the heavenly manna: thus worldlings
loathe the things of heaven, for which they have no relish.

21:6. Wherefore the Lord sent among the people fiery serpents, which bit
them and killed many of them.

Fiery serpents... They are so called, because they that were bitten by
them were burnt with a violent heat.

21:7. Upon which they came to Moses, and said; We have sinned, because
we have spoken against the Lord and thee: pray that he may take away
these serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.

21:8. And the Lord said to him: Make a brazen serpent, and set it up for
a sign: whosoever being struck shall look on it, shall live.

21:9. Moses therefore made a brazen serpent, and set it up for a sign:
which when they that were bitten looked upon, they were healed.

A brazen serpent... This was a figure of Christ crucified, and of the
efficacy of a lively faith in him, against the bites of the hellish
serpent. John 3.14.

21:10. And the children of Israel setting forwards camped in Oboth.

21:11. And departing thence they pitched their tents in Jeabarim, in the
wilderness, that faceth Moab toward the east.

21:12. And removing from thence, they came to the torrent Zared:

21:13. Which they left and encamped over against Arnon, which is in the
desert and standeth out on the borders of the Amorrhite. For Arnon is
the border of Moab, dividing the Moabites and the Amorrhites.

21:14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord: As he
did in the Red Sea, so will he do in the streams of Arnon.

The book of the wars, etc... An ancient book, which, like several others
quoted in scripture, has been lost.

21:15. The rocks of the torrents were bowed down that they might rest in
Ar, and lie down in the borders of the Moabites.

21:16. When they went from that place, the well appeared whereof the
Lord said to Moses: Gather the people together, and I will give them
water.

21:17. Then Israel sung this song: Let the well spring up. They sung
thereto:

21:18. The well, which the princes dug, and the chiefs of the people
prepared by the direction of the lawgiver, and with their staves. And
they marched from the wilderness to Mathana.

21:19. From Mathana unto Nahaliel: from Nahaliel unto Bamoth.

21:20. From Bamoth, is a valley in the country of Moab, to the top of
Phasga, which looked towards the desert.

21:21. And Israel sent messengers to Sehon king of the Amorrhites,
saying:

21:22. I beseech thee that I may have leave to pass through thy land: we
will not go aside into the fields or the vineyards, we will not drink
waters of the wells, we will go the king's highway, till we be past thy
borders.

21:23. And he would not grant that Israel should pass by his borders:
but rather gathering an army, went forth to meet them in the desert, and
came to Jasa and fought against them.

21:24. And he was slain by them with the edge of the sword, and they
possessed his land from the Arnon unto the Jeboc, and to the confines of
the children of Ammon: for the borders of the Ammonites, were kept with
a strong garrison.

21:25. So Israel took all his cities, and dwelt in the cities of the
Amorrhite, to wit, in Hesebon, and in the villages thereof.

21:26. Hesebon was the city of Sehon the king of the Amorrhites, who
fought against the king of Moab: and took all the land, that had been of
his dominion, as far as the Arnon.

21:27. Therefore it is said in the proverb: Come into Hesebon, let the
city of Sehon be built and set up:

21:28. A fire is gone out of Hesebon, a flame from the city of Sehon,
and hath consumed Ar of the Moabites, and the inhabitants of the high
places of the Arnon.

21:29. Woe to thee Moab: thou art undone, O people of Chamos. He hath
given his sons to flight, and his daughters into captivity to Sehon the
king of the Amorrhites.

21:30. Their yoke is perished from Hesebon unto Dibon, they came weary
to Nophe, and unto Medaba.

21:31. So Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorrhite.

21:32. And Moses sent some to take a view of Jazer: and they took the
villages of it, and conquered the inhabitants.

21:33. And they turned themselves, and went up by the way of Basan, and
Og the king of Basan came against them with all his people, to fight in
Edrai.

21:34. And the Lord said to Moses: Fear him not, for I have delivered
him and all his people, and his country into thy hand: and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst to Sehon the king of the Amorrhites, the inhabitant
of Hesebon.

21:35. So they slew him also with his sons, and all his people, not
letting any one escape, and they possessed his land.

Numbers Chapter 22

Balac, king of Moab, sendeth twice for Balaam to curse Israel. In his
way Balaam is rebuked by an angel.

22:1. And they went forward and encamped in the plains of Moab, over
against where Jericho is situate beyond the Jordan.

22:2. And Balac the son of Sephor, seeing all that Israel had done to
the Amorrhite,

22:3. And that the Moabites were in great fear of him, and were not able
to sustain his assault,

22:4. He said to the elders of Madian: So will this people destroy all
that dwell in our borders, as the ox is wont to eat the grass to the
very roots. Now he was at that time king in Moab.

22:5. He sent therefore messengers to Balaam the son of Beor, a
soothsayer, who dwelt by the river of the land of the children of Ammon,
to call him, and to say: Behold a people is come out of Egypt, that hath
covered the face of the earth, sitting over against me.

22:6. Come therefore, and curse this people, because it is mightier than
I: if by any means I may beat them and drive them out of my land: for I
know that he whom thou shalt bless is blessed, and he whom thou shalt
curse is cursed.

22:7. And the ancients of Moab, and the elders of Madian, went with the
price of divination in their hands. And where they were come to Balaam,
and had told him all the words of Balac:

22:8. He answered: Tarry here this night and I will answer whatsoever
the Lord shall say to me. And while they stayed with Balaam, God came
and said to him:

22:9. What mean these men that are with thee?

22:10. He answered: Balac the son of Sephor king of the Moabites hath
sent to me,

22:11. Saying: Behold a people that is come out of Egypt, hath covered
the face of the land: come and curse them, if by any means I may fight
with them and drive them away.

22:12. And God said to Balaam: Thou shalt not go with them, nor shalt
thou curse the people: because it is blessed.

22:13. And he rose in the morning and said to the princes: Go into your
country, because the Lord hath forbid me to come with you.

22:14. The princes returning, said to Balac: Balaam would not come with
us.

22:15. Then he sent many more and more noble than he had sent before:

22:16. Who, when they were come to Balaam, said: Thus saith Balac the
son of Sephor, Delay not to come to me:

22:17. For I am ready to honour thee, and will give thee whatsoever thou
wilt: come and curse this people.

22:18. Balaam answered: If Balac would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot alter the word of the Lord my God, to speak either
more or less.

22:19. I pray you to stay here this night also, that I may know what the
Lord will answer me once more.

To stay... His desiring them to stay, after he had been fully informed
already that it was not God's will he should go, came from the
inclination he had to gratify Balac, for the sake of worldly gain. And
this perverse disposition God punished by permitting him to go (though
not to curse the people as he would willingly have done), and suffering
him to fall still deeper and deeper into sin, till he came at last to
give that abominable counsel against the people of God, which ended in
his own destruction. So sad a thing it is to indulge a passion for
money.

22:20. God therefore came to Balaam in the night, and said to him: If
these men be come to call thee, arise and go with them: yet so, that
thou do what I shall command thee.

22:21. Balaam arose in the morning, and saddling his ass went with them.

22:22. And God was angry. And an angel of the Lord stood in the way
against Balaam, who sat on the ass, and had two servants with him.

22:23. The ass seeing the angel standing in the way, with a drawn sword,
turned herself out of the way, and went into the field. And when Balaam
beat her, and had a mind to bring her again to the way,

22:24. The angel stood in a narrow place between two walls, wherewith
the vineyards were enclosed.

22:25. And the ass seeing him, thrust herself close to the wall, and
bruised the foot of the rider. But he beat her again:

22:26. And nevertheless the angel going on to a narrow place, where
there was no way to turn aside either to the right hand or to the left,
stood to meet him.

22:27. And when the ass saw the angel standing, she fell under the feet
of the rider: who being angry beat her sides more vehemently with a
staff.

22:28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said: What have
I done to thee? Why strikest thou me, lo, now this third time?

Opened the mouth, etc... The angel moved the tongue of the ass, to utter
these speeches, to rebuke, by the mouth of a brute beast, the brutal
fury and folly of Balaam.

22:29. Balaam answered: Because thou hast deserved it, and hast served
me ill: I would I had a sword that I might kill thee.

22:30. The ass said: Am not I thy beast, on which thou hast been always
accustomed to ride until this present day? tell me if I ever did the
like thing to thee. But he said: Never.

22:31. Forthwith the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the
angel standing in the way with a drawn sword, and he worshipped him
falling flat on the ground.

22:32. And the angel said to him: Why beatest thou thy ass these three
times? I am come to withstand thee, because thy way is perverse, and
contrary to me:

Perverse... Because thy inclinations are wicked in being willing for the
sake of gain to curse the people of whom I am the guardian.

22:33. And unless the ass had turned out of the way, giving place to me
who stood against thee, I had slain thee, and she should have lived.

22:34. Balaam said: I have sinned, not knowing that thou didst stand
against me: and now if it displease thee that I go, I will return.

22:35. The angel said: Go with these men, and see thou speak no other
thing than what I shall command thee. He went therefore with the
princes.

22:36. And when Balac heard it he came forth to meet him in a town of
the Moabites, that is situate in the uttermost borders of Arnon.

22:37. And he said to Balaam: I sent messengers to call thee, why didst
thou not come immediately to me? was it because I am not able to reward
thy coming?

22:38. He answered him: Lo, here I am: shall I have power to speak any
other thing but that which God shall put in my mouth?

22:39. So they went on together, and came into a city, that was in the
uttermost borders of his kingdom.

22:40. And when Balac had killed oxen and sheep, he sent presents to
Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.

22:41. And when morning was come, he brought him to the high places of
Baal, and he beheld the uttermost part of the people.

Numbers Chapter 23

Balaam, instead of cursing Israel, is obliged to bless them, and
prophesy good things of them.

23:1. And Balaam said to Balac: Build me here seven altars, and prepare
as many calves, and the same number of rams.

23:2. And when he had done according to the word of Balaam, they laid
together a calf and a ram upon every altar.

23:3. And Balaam said to Balac: Stand a while by thy burnt offering,
until I go, to see if perhaps the Lord will meet me, and whatsoever he
shall command, I will speak to thee.

23:4. And when he was gone with speed, God met him. And Balaam speaking
to him, said: I have erected seven altars, and have laid on everyone a
calf and a ram.

23:5. And the Lord put the word in his mouth, and said: Return to Balac,
and thus shalt thou speak.

23:6. Returning he found Balac standing by his burnt offering, with all
the princes of the Moabites:

23:7. And taking up his parable, he said: Balac king of the Moabites
hath brought me from Aram, from the mountains of the east: Come, said
he, and curse Jacob: make haste and detest Israel.

23:8. How shall I curse him, whom God hath not cursed? By what means
should I detest him, whom the Lord detesteth not?

23:9. I shall see him from the tops of the rocks, and shall consider him
from the hills. This people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned
among the nations.

23:10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and know the number of the stock
of Israel? Let my soul die the death of the just, and my last end be
like to them.

23:11. And Balac said to Balaam: What is this that thou dost? I sent for
thee to curse my enemies: and thou contrariwise blessest them.

23:12. He answered him: Can I speak any thing else but what the Lord
commandeth?

23:13. Balac therefore said: Come with me to another place from whence
thou mayest see part of Israel, and canst not see them all: curse them
from thence.

23:14. And when he had brought him to a high place, upon the top of
mount Phasga, Balaam built seven altars, and laying on every one a calf
and a ram,

23:15. He said to Balac: Stand here by thy burnt offering while I go to
meet him.

23:16. And when the Lord had met him, and had put the word in his mouth,
he said: Return to Balac, and thus shalt thou say to him.

23:17. Returning he found him standing by his burnt sacrifice, and the
princes of the Moabites with him. And Balac said to him: What hath the
Lord spoken?

23:18. But he taking up his parable, said: Stand, O Balac, and give ear:
hear, thou son of Sephor:

23:19. God is not a man, that he should lie, nor is the son of man, that
he should be changed. Hath he said then, and will he not do? hath he
spoken, and will he not fulfil?

23:20. I was brought to bless, the blessing I am not able to hinder.

23:21. There is no idol in Jacob, neither is there an image god to be
seen in Israel. The Lord his God is with him, and the sound of the
victory of the king in him.

23:22. God hath brought him out of Egypt, whose strength is like to the
rhinoceros.

23:23. There is no soothsaying in Jacob, nor divination in Israel. In
their times it shall be told to Jacob and to Israel what God hath
wrought.

23:24. Behold the people shall rise up as a lioness, and shall lift
itself up as a lion: it shall not lie down till it devour the prey, and
drink the blood of the slain.

23:25. And Balac said to Balaam: Neither curse, nor bless him.

23:26. And he said: Did I not tell thee, that whatsoever God should
command me, that I would do?

23:27. And Balac said to him: Come and I will bring thee to another
place; if peradventure it please God that thou mayest curse them from
thence.

23:28. And when he had brought him upon the top of mount Phogor, which
looketh towards the wilderness,

23:29. Balaam said to him: Build me here seven altars, and prepare as
many calves, and the same number of rams.

23:30. Balac did as Balaam had said: and he laid on every altar, a calf
and a ram.

Numbers Chapter 24

Balaam still continues to prophesy good things in favour of Israel.

24:1. And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord that he should bless
Israel, he went not as he had gone before, to seek divination: but
setting his face towards the desert,

24:2. And lifting up his eyes, he saw Israel abiding in their tents by
their tribes: and the spirit of God rushing upon him,

24:3. He took up his parable and said: Balaam the son of Beor hath said:
The man hath said, whose eye is stopped up:

24:4. The bearer of the words of God hath said, he that hath beheld the
vision of the Almighty, he that falleth, and so his eyes are opened:

24:5. How beautiful are thy tabernacles O Jacob, and thy tents, O
Israel!

24:6. As woody valleys, as watered gardens near the rivers, as
tabernacles which the Lord hath pitched, as cedars by the waterside.

24:7. Water shall flow out of his bucket, and his seed shall be in many
waters. For Agag his king shall be removed, and his kingdom shall be
taken away.

24:8. God hath brought him out of Egypt, whose strength is like to the
rhinoceros. They shall devour the nations that are his enemies, and
break their bones, and pierce them with arrows.

24:9. Lying down he hath slept as a lion, and as a lioness, whom none
shall dare to rouse. He that blesseth thee, shall also himself be
blessed: he that curseth thee shall be reckoned accursed.

24:10. And Balac being angry against Balaam, clapped his hands together
and said: I called thee to curse my enemies, and thou on the contrary
hast blessed them three times.

24:11. Return to thy place. I had determined indeed greatly to honour
thee, but the Lord hath deprived thee of the honour designed for thee.

24:12. Balaam made answer to Balac: Did I not say to thy messengers,
whom thou sentest to me:

24:13. If Balac would give me his house full of silver and gold, I
cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to utter any thing of my
own head either good or evil: but whatsoever the Lord shall say, that I
will speak?

24:14. But yet going to my people, I will give thee counsel, what this
people shall do to thy people in the latter days.

24:15. Therefore taking up his parable, again he said: Balaam the son of
Beor hath said: The man whose eye is stopped up, hath said:

24:16. The hearer of the words of God hath said, who knoweth the
doctrine of the Highest, and seeth the visions of the Almighty, who
falling hath his eyes opened:

24:17. I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not near. A
STAR SHALL RISE out of Jacob and a sceptre shall spring up from Israel:
and shall strike the chiefs of Moab, and shall waste all the children of
Seth

24:18. And he shall possess Idumea: the inheritance of Seir shall come
to their enemies, but Israel shall do manfully.

24:19. Out of Jacob shall he come that shall rule, and shall destroy the
remains of the city.

24:20. And when he saw Amalec, he took up his parable, and said: Amalec
the beginning of nations, whose latter ends shall be destroyed.

24:21. He saw also the Cinite: and took up his parable, and said: Thy
habitation indeed is strong: but though thou build thy nest in a rock,

24:22. And thou be chosen of the stock of Cin, how long shalt thou be
able to continue? For Assur shall take thee captive.

24:23. And taking up his parable, again he said: Alas, who shall live
when God shall do these things?

24:24. They shall come in galleys from Italy, they shall overcome the
Assyrians, and shall waste the Hebrews, and at the last they themselves
also shall perish.

24:25. And Balaam rose, and returned to his place: Balac also returned
the way that he came.

Numbers Chapter 25

The people fall into fornication and idolatry; for which twenty-four
thousand are slain. The zeal of Phinees.

25:1. And Israel at that time abode in Settim, and the people committed
fornication with the daughters of Moab,

25:2. Who called them to their sacrifices. And they ate of them, and
adored their gods.

25:3. And Israel was initiated to Beelphegor: upon which the Lord being
angry,

Initiated to Beelphegor... That is, they took to the worship of
Beelphegor, an obscene idol of the Moabites, and were consecrated, as it
were, to him.

25:4. Said to Moses: Take all the princes of the people, and hang them
up on gibbets against the sun: that my fury may be turned away from
Israel.

25:5. And Moses said to the judges of Israel: Let every man kill his
neighbours, that have been initiated to Beelphegor.

25:6. And behold one of the children of Israel went in before his
brethren to a harlot of Madian, in the sight of Moses and of all the
children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle.

25:7. And when Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
saw it, he rose up from the midst of the multitude, and taking a dagger,

25:8. Went in after the Israelite into the brothel house, and thrust
both of them through together, to wit, the man and the woman in the
genital parts. And the scourge ceased from the children of Israel.

25:9. And there were slain four and twenty thousand men.

25:10. And the Lord said to Moses:

25:11. Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, hath
turned away my wrath from the children of Israel: because he was moved
with my zeal against them, that I myself might not destroy the children
of Israel in my zeal.

25:12. Therefore say to him: behold I give him the peace of my covenant,

25:13. And the covenant of the priesthood for ever shall be both to him
and his seed, because he hath been zealous for his God, and hath made
atonement for the wickedness of the children of Israel.

25:14. And the name of the Israelite, that was slain with the woman of
Madian, was Zambri the son of Salu, a prince of the kindred and tribe of
Simeon.

25:15. And the Madianite woman, that was slain with him, was called
Cozbi the daughter of Sur, a most noble prince among the Madianites.

25:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

25:17. Let the Madianites find you their enemies, and slay you them:

25:18. Because they also have acted like enemies against you, and have
guilefully deceived you by the idol Phogor, and Cozbi their sister, a
daughter of a prince of Madian, who was slain in the day of the plague
for the sacrilege of Phogor.

Numbers Chapter 26

The people are again numbered by their tribes and families.

26:1. After the blood of the guilty was shed, the Lord said to Moses and
to Eleazar the son of Aaron, the priest:

26:2. Number the whole sum of the children of Israel from twenty years
old and upward, by their houses and kindreds, all that are able to go
forth to war.

26:3. Moses therefore and Eleazar the priest, being in the plains of
Moab upon the Jordan over against Jericho, spoke to them that were

26:4. From twenty years old and upward, as the Lord had commanded: and
this is the number of them:

26:5. Ruben the firstborn of Israel. His sons were Henoch, of whom is
the family of the Henochites: and Phallu, of whom is the family of the
Phalluites:

26:6. And Hesron, of whom is the family of the Hesronites: and Charmi,
of whom is the family of the Charmites.

26:7. These are the families of the stock of Ruben: whose number was
found to be forty-three thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:8. The son of Phallu was Eliab.

26:9. His sons, were Namuel and Dathan and Abiron. These are Dathan and
Abiron the princes of the people, that rose against Moses and Aaron in
the sedition of Core, when they rebelled against the Lord:

26:10. And the earth opening her mouth swallowed up Core, many others
dying, when the fire burned two hundred and fifty men. And there was a
great miracle wrought,

26:11. That when Core perished, his sons did not perish.

26:12. The sons of Simeon by their kindreds: Namuel, of him is the
family of the Namuelites: Jamin, of him is the family of the Jaminites:
Jachim, of him is the family of the Jachimites:

26:13. Zare, of him is the family of the Zarites: Saul, of him is the
family of the Saulites.

26:14. These are the families of the stock of Simeon, of which the whole
number was twenty-two thousand two hundred.

26:15. The sons of Gad by their kindreds: Sephon, of him is the family
of the Sephonites: Aggi, of him is the family of the Aggites: Suni, of
him is the family of the Sunites:

26:16. Ozni, of him is the family of the Oznites: Her, of him is the
family of the Herites:

26:17. Arod, of him is the family of the Arodites: Ariel, of him is the
family of the Arielites.

26:18. These are the families of Gad, of which the whole number was
forty thousand five hundred.

26:19. The sons of Juda, Her and Onan, who both died in the land of
Chanaan.

26:20. And the sons of Juda by their kindreds were: Sela, of whom is the
family of the Selaites: Phares, of whom is the family of the Pharesites:
Zare, of whom is the family of the Zarites.

26:21. Moreover the sons of Phares were: Hesron, of whom is the family
of the Hesronites: and Hamul, of whom is the family of the Hamulites.

26:22. These are the families of Juda, of which the whole number was
seventy-six thousand five hundred.

26:23. The sons of Issachar, by their kindreds: Thola of whom is the
family of the Tholaites: Phua, of whom is the family of the Phuaites:

26:24. Jasub, of whom is the family of the Jasubites: Semran, of whom is
the family of the Semranites.

26:25. These are the kindreds of Issachar, whose number was sixty-four
thousand three hundred.

26:26. The sons of Zabulon by their kindreds: Sared, of whom is the
family of the Saredites: Elon, of whom is the family of the Elonites:
Jalel, of whom is the family of the Jalelites.

26:27. These are the kindreds of Zabulon, whose number was sixty
thousand five hundred.

26:28. The sons of Joseph by their kindred, Manasses and Ephraim.

26:29. Of Manasses was born Machir, of whom is the family of the
Machirites. Machir begot Galaad, of whom is the family of the
Galaadites.

26:30. Galaad had sons: Jezer, of whom is the family of the Jezerites:
and Helec, of whom is the family of the Helecites:

26:31. And Asriel, of whom is the family of the Asrielites: and Sechem,
of whom is the family of the Sechemites:

26:32. And Semida, of whom is the family of the Semidaites: and Hepher,
of whom is the family of the Hepherites.

26:33. And Hepher was the father of Salphaad, who had no sons, but only
daughters, whose names are these: Maala, and Noa, and Hegla, and Melcha,
and Thersa.

26:34. These are the families of Manasses, and the number of them fifty-
two thousand seven hundred.

26:35. And the sons of Ephraim by their kindreds were these: Suthala, of
whom is the family of the Suthalaites: Becher, of whom is the family of
the Becherites: Thehen, of whom is the family of the Thehenites.

26:36. Now the son of Suthala was Heran, of whom is the family of the
Heranites.

26:37. These are the kindreds of the sons of Ephraim: whose number was
thirty-two thousand five hundred.

26:38. These are the sons of Joseph by their families. The sons of
Benjamin in their kindreds: Bela, of whom is the family of the Belaites:
Asbel, of whom is the family of the Asbelites: Ahiram, of whom is the
family of the Ahiramites:

26:39. Supham, of whom is the family of the Suphamites: Hupham, of whom
is the family of the Huphamites.

26:40. The sons of Bela: Hered, and Noeman. Of Hered, is the family of
the Heredites: of Noeman, the family of the Noemanites.

26:41. These are the sons of Benjamin by their kindreds, whose number
was forty-five thousand six hundred.

26:42. The sons of Dan by their kindreds: Suham, of whom is the family
of the Suhamites: These are the kindreds of Dan by their families.

26:43. All were Suhamites, whose number was sixty-four thousand four
hundred.

26:44. The sons of Aser by their kindreds: Jemna, of whom is the family
of the Jemnaites: Jessui, of whom is the family of the Jessuites: Brie,
of whom is the family of the Brieites.

26:45. The sons of Brie: Heber, of whom is the family of the Heberites:
and Melchiel, of whom is the family of the Melchielites.

26:46. And the name of the daughter of Aser, was Sara.

26:47. These are the kindreds of the sons of Aser, and their number
fifty-three thousand four hundred.

26:48. The sons of Nephtali by their kindreds: Jesiel, of whom is the
family of the Jesielites: Guni, of whom is the family of the Gunites:

26:49. Jeser, of whom is the family of the Jeserites: Sellem, of whom is
the family of the Sellemites.

26:50. These are the kindreds of the sons of Nephtali by their families:
whose number was forty-five thousand four hundred.

26:51. This is the sum of the children of Israel, that were reckoned up,
six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:52. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

26:53. To these shall the land be divided for their possessions
according to the number of names.

26:54. To the greater number thou shalt give a greater portion, and to
the fewer a less: to every one, as they have now been reckoned up, shall
a possession be delivered:

26:55. Yet so that by lot the land be divided to the tribe and families.

26:56. Whatsoever shall fall by lot, that shall be taken by the more, or
the fewer.

26:57. This also is the number of the sons of Levi by their families:
Gerson, of whom is the family of the Gersonites: Caath, of whom is the
family of the Caathites: Merari, of whom is the family of the Merarites.

26:58. These are the families of Levi: The family of Lobni, the family
of Hebroni, the family of Core. Now Caath begot Amram:

26:59. Who had to wife Jochabed the daughter of Levi, who was born to
him in Egypt. She bore to her husband Amram sons, Aaron and Moses, and
Mary their sister.

26:60. Of Aaron were born Nadab and Abiu, and Eleazar and Ithamar:

26:61. Of whom Nadab and Abiu died, when they had offered the strange
fire before the Lord.

26:62. And all that were numbered, were twenty-three thousand males from
one month old and upward: for they were not reckoned up among the
children of Israel, neither was a possession given to them with the
rest.

26:63. This is the number of the children of Israel, that were enrolled
by Moses and Eleazar the priest, in the plains of Moab upon the Jordan,
over against Jericho.

26:64. Among whom there was not one of them that were numbered before by
Moses and Aaron in the desert of Sinai.

26:65. For the Lord had foretold that they should die in the wilderness.
And none remained of them, but Caleb the son of Jephone, and Josue the
son of Nun.

Numbers Chapter 27

The law of inheritance. Josue is appointed to succeed Moses.

27:1. Then came the daughters of Salphaad, the son of Hepher, the son of
Galaad, the son of Machir, the son of Manasses, who was the son of
Joseph: and their names are Maala, and Noa, and Hegla, and Melcha, and
Thersa.

27:2. And they stood before Moses and Eleazar the priest, and all the
princes of the people at the door of the tabernacle of the covenant, and
said:

27:3. Our father died in the desert, and was not in the sedition, that
was raised against the Lord under Core, but he died in his own sin: and
he had no male children. Why is his name taken away out of his family,
because he had no son? Give us a possession among the kinsmen of our
father.

27:4. And Moses referred their cause to the judgment of the Lord.

27:5. And the Lord said to him:

27:6. The daughters of Salphaad demand a just thing: Give them a
possession among their father's kindred, and let them succeed him in his
inheritance.

27:7. And to the children of Israel thou shalt speak these things:

27:8. When a man dieth without a son, his inheritance shall pass to his
daughter.

27:9. If he have no daughter, his brethren shall succeed him.

27:10. And if he have no brethren, you shall give the inheritance to his
father's brethren.

27:11. But if he have no uncles by the father, the inheritance shall be
given to them that are the next akin. And this shall be to the children
of Israel sacred by a perpetual law, as the Lord hath commanded Moses.

27:12. The Lord also said to Moses: Go up into this mountain Abarim, and
view from thence the land which I will give to the children of Israel.

27:13. And when thou shalt have seen it, thou also shalt go to thy
people, as thy brother Aaron is gone:

27:14. Because you offended me in the desert of Sin in the contradiction
of the multitude, neither would you sanctify me before them at the
waters. These are the waters of contradiction in Cades of the desert of
Sin.

27:15. And Moses answered him:

27:16. May the Lord the God of the spirits of all flesh provide a man,
that may be over this multitude:

27:17. And may go out and in before them, and may lead them out, or
bring them in: lest the people of the Lord be as sheep without a
shepherd.

27:18. And the Lord said to him: take Josue the son of Nun, a man in
whom is the Spirit, and put thy hand upon him.

27:19. And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest and all the
multitude:

27:20. And thou shalt give him precepts in the sight of all, and part of
thy glory, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may hear
him.

27:21. If any thing be to be done, Eleazar the priest shall consult the
Lord for him. He and all the children of Israel with him, and the rest
of the multitude shall go out and go in at his word.

27:22. Moses did as the Lord had commanded. And, when he had taken
Josue, he set him before Eleazar the priest, and all the assembly of the
people,

27:23. And laying his hands on his head, he repeated all things that the
Lord had commanded.

Numbers Chapter 28

Sacrifices are appointed as well for every day as for sabbaths, and
other festivals.

28:1. The Lord also said to Moses:

28:2. Command the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: Offer
ye my oblation and my bread, and burnt sacrifice of most sweet odour, in
their due seasons.

28:3. These are the sacrifices which you shall offer: Two lambs of a
year old without blemish every day for the perpetual holocaust:

28:4. One you shall offer in the mornings, and the other in the evening:

28:5. And the tenth part of an ephi of flour, which shall be tempered
with the, purest oil, of the measure of the fourth part of a hin.

28:6. It is the continual holocaust which you offered in mount Sinai for
a most sweet odour of a sacrifice by fire to the Lord.

28:7. And for a libation you shall offer of wine the fourth part of a
hin for every lamb in the sanctuary of the Lord.

28:8. And you shall offer the other lamb in like manner in the evening
according to all the rites of the morning sacrifice, and of the
libations thereof, an oblation of most sweet odour to the Lord.

28:9. And on the sabbath day you shall offer two lambs of a year old
without blemish, and two tenths of flour tempered with oil in sacrifice,
and the libations,

28:10. Which regularly are poured out every sabbath for the perpetual
holocaust.

28:11. And on the first day of the month you shall offer a holocaust to
the Lord, two calves of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year
old, without blemish,

28:12. And three tenths of flour tempered with oil in sacrifice for
every calf: and two tenths of flour tempered with oil for every ram:

28:13. And the tenth of a tenth of flour tempered with oil in sacrifice
for every lamb. It is a holocaust of most sweet odour and an offering by
fire to the Lord.

28:14. And these shall be the libations of wine that are to be poured
out for every victim: Half a hin for every calf, a third for a ram, and
a fourth for a lamb. This shall be the holocaust for every month, as
they succeed one another in the course of the year.

28:15. A buck goat also shall be offered to the Lord for a sin offering
over and above the perpetual holocaust with its libations.

28:16. And in the first month, on the four tenth day of the month, shall
be the phase of the Lord,

28:17. And on the fifteenth day the solemn feast: seven days shall they
eat unleavened bread.

28:18. And the first day of them shall be venerable and holy: you shall
not do any servile work therein.

28:19. And you shall offer a burnt sacrifice a holocaust to the Lord,
two calves of the herd, one ram, seven lambs of a year old, without
blemish:

28:20. And for the sacrifice of every one three tenths of flour which
shall be tempered with oil to every calf, and two tenths to every ram,

28:21. And the tenth of a tenth, to every lamb, that is to say, to all
the seven lambs:

28:22. And one buck goat for sin, to make atonement for you,

28:23. Besides the morning holocaust which you shall always offer.

28:24. So shall you do every day of the seven days for the food of the
fire, and for a most sweet odour to the Lord, which shall rise from the
holocaust, and from the libations of each.

28:25. The seventh day also shall be most solemn and holy unto you, you
shall do no servile work therein.

28:26. The day also of firstfruits, when after the weeks are
accomplished, you shall offer new fruits to the Lord, shall be venerable
and holy: you shall do no servile work therein.

28:27. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
Lord, two calves of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old,
without blemish:

28:28. And in the sacrifices of them three tenths of flour tempered with
oil to every calf, two to every ram,

28:29. The tenth of a tenth to every lamb, which in all are seven lambs:
a buck goat also,

28:30. Which is slain for expiation: besides the perpetual holocaust and
the libations thereof.

28:31. You shall offer them all without blemish with their libations.

Numbers Chapter 29

Sacrifices for the festivals of the seventh month.

29:1. The first day also of the seventh month shall be venerable and
holy unto you; you shall do no servile work therein, because it is the
day of the sounding and of trumpets.

29:2. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
Lord, one calf of the herd, one ram and seven lambs of a year old,
without blemish.

29:3. And for their sacrifices, three tenths of flour tempered with oil
to every calf, two tenths to a ram,

29:4. One tenth to a lamb, which in all are seven lambs:

29:5. And a buck goat for sin, which is offered for the expiation of the
people,

29:6. Besides the holocaust of the first day of the month with the
sacrifices thereof, and the perpetual holocaust with the accustomed
libations. With the same ceremonies you shall offer a burnt sacrifice
for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

29:7. The tenth day also of this seventh month shall be holy and
venerable unto you, and you shall afflict your souls; you shall do no
servile work therein.

29:8. And you shall offer a holocaust to the Lord for a most sweet
odour, one calf of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old,
without blemish:

29:9. And for their sacrifices, three tenths of flour tempered with oil
to every calf, two tenths to a ram,

29:10. The tenth of a tenth to every lamb, which are in all seven lambs:

29:11. And a buck goat for sin, besides the things that are wont to be
offered for sin, for expiation, and for the perpetual holocaust with
their sacrifice and libations.

29:12. And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, which shall be
unto you holy and venerable, you shall do no servile work, but shall
celebrate a solemnity to the Lord seven days.

29:13. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
Lord, thirteen calves of the herd, two rams, and fourteen lambs of a
year old, without blemish:

29:14. And for their libations three tenths of flour tempered with oil
to every calf, being in all thirteen calves: and two tenths to each ram,
being two rams,

29:15. And the tenth of a tenth to every lamb, being in all fourteen
lambs:

29:16. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:17. On the second day you shall offer twelve calves of the herd, two
rams and fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:18. And the sacrifices and the libations for every one, for the
calves and for the rams and for the lambs you shall duly celebrate:

29:19. And a buck goat for a sin offering besides the perpetual
holocaust, and the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:20. The third day you shall offer eleven calves, two rams, and
fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:21. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall offer according to the
rite:

29:22. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice, and the libation thereof.

29:23. The fourth day you shall offer ten calves, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:24. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate in right manner:

29:25. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:26. The fifth day you shall offer nine calves, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:27. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
rite:

29:28. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:29. The sixth day you shall offer eight calves, two rams, and
fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:30. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
rite:

29:31. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:32. The seventh day you shall offer seven calves and two rams, and
fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:33. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
rite:

29:34. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:35. On the eighth day, which is most solemn, you shall do no servile
work:

29:36. But you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
Lord, one calf, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old, without blemish:

29:37. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
rite:

29:38. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and the
sacrifice and the libation thereof.

29:39. These things shall you offer to the Lord in your solemnities:
besides your vows and voluntary oblations for holocaust, for sacrifice,
for libation, and for victims of peace offerings.

Numbers Chapter 30

Of vows and oaths: and their obligation.

30:1. And Moses told the children of Israel all that the Lord had
commanded him:

30:2. And he said to the princes of the tribes of the children of
Israel: This is the word that the Lord hath commanded:

30:3. If any man make a vow to the Lord, or bind himself by an oath: he
shall not make his word void but shall fulfil all that he promised.

30:4. If a woman vow any thing, and bind herself by an oath, being in
her father's house, and but yet a girl in age: if her father knew the
vow that she hath promised, and the oath wherewith she hath bound her
soul, and held his peace, she shall be bound by the vow:

30:5. Whatsoever she promised and swore, she shall fulfil in deed.

30:6. But if her father, immediately as soon as he heard it, gainsaid
it, both her vows and her oaths shall be void, neither shall she be
bound to what she promised, because her father hath gainsaid it.

30:7. If she have a husband, and shall vow any thing, and the word once
going out of her mouth shall bind her soul by an oath,

30:8. The day that her husband shall hear it, and not gainsay it, she
shall be bound to the vow, and shall give whatsoever she promised.

30:9. But if as soon as he heareth he gainsay it, and make her promises
and the words wherewith she had bound her soul of no effect: the Lord
will forgive her.

30:10. The widow, and she that is divorced, shall fulfil whatsoever they
vow.

30:11. If the wife in the house of her husband, hath bound herself by
vow and by oath,

30:12. If her husband hear, and hold his peace, and doth not disallow
the promise, she shall accomplish whatsoever she had promised.

30:13. But if forthwith he gainsay it, she shall not be bound by the
promise: because her husband gainsaid it, and the Lord will be merciful
to her.

30:14. If she vow and bind herself by oath, to afflict her soul by
fasting, or abstinence from other things, it shall depend on the will of
her husband, whether she shall do it, or not do it.

30:15. But if the husband hearing it hold his peace, and defer the
declaring his mind till another day: whatsoever she had vowed and
promised, she shall fulfil: because immediately as he heard it, he held
his peace.

30:16. But if he gainsay it after that he knew it, he shall bear her
iniquity.

30:17. These are the laws which the Lord appointed to Moses between the
husband and the wife, between the father and the daughter that is as yet
but a girl in age, or that abideth in her father's house.

Numbers Chapter 31

The Madianites are slain for having drawn the people of Israel into sin.
The dividing of the booty.

31:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

31:2. Revenge first the children of Israel on the Madianites, and so
thou shalt be gathered to thy people.

31:3. And Moses forthwith said: Arm of you men to fight, who may take
the revenge of the Lord on the Madianites.

31:4. Let a thousand men be chosen out of every tribe of Israel to be
sent to the war.

31:5. And they gave a thousand of every tribe, that is to say, twelve
thousand men well appointed for battle.

31:6. And Moses sent them with Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest,
and he delivered to him the holy vessels, and the trumpets to sound.

31:7. And when they had fought against the Madianites and had overcome
them, they slew all the men.

31:8. And their kings Evi, and Recem, and Sur, and Hur, and Rebe, five
princes of the nation: Balaam also the son of Beor they killed with the
sword.

31:9. And they took their women, and their children captives, and all
their cattle, and all their goods: and all their possessions they
plundered:

31:10. And all their cities, and their villages, and castles, they
burned.

31:11. And they carried away the booty, and all that they had taken both
of men and of beasts.

31:12. And they brought them to Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and to
all the multitude of the children of Israel. But the rest of the things
for use they carried to the camp on the plains of Moab, beside the
Jordan over against Jericho.

31:13. And Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the princes of the
synagogue went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14. And Moses being angry with the chief officers of the army, the
tribunes, and the centurions that were come from the battle,

31:15. Said: Why have you saved the women?

31:16. Are not these they, that deceived the children of Israel by the
counsel of Balaam, and made you transgress against the Lord by the sin
of Phogor, for which also the people was punished?

The sin of Phogor... The sin committed in the worship of Beelphegor.

31:17. Therefore kill all that are of the male sex, even of the
children: and put to death the women, that have carnally known men.

Of children... Women and children, ordinarilly speaking, were not to be
killed in war, Deut. 20.14. But the great Lord of life and death was
pleased to order it otherwise in the present case, in detestation of the
wickedness of this people, who by the counsel of Balaam, had sent their
women among the Israelites on purpose to draw them from God.

31:18. But the girls, and all the women that are virgins save for
yourselves:

31:19. And stay without the camp seven days. He that hath killed a man,
or touched one that is killed, shall be purified the third day and the
seventh day.

31:20. And of all the spoil, every garment, or vessel, or any thing made
for use, of the skins, or hair of goats, or of wood, shall be purified.

31:21. Eleazar also the priest spoke to the men of the army, that had
fought, in this manner: This is the ordinance of the law, which the Lord
hath commanded Moses:

31:22. Gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin,

31:23. And all that may pass through the fire, shall be purified by
fire, but whatsoever cannot abide the fire, shall be sanctified with the
water of expiation:

31:24. And you shall wash your garments the seventh day, and being
purified, you shall afterwards enter into the camp.

31:25. And the Lord said to Moses:

31:26. Take the sum of the things that were taken both of man and beast,
thou and Eleazar the priest and the princes of the multitude:

31:27. And thou shalt divide the spoil equally, between them that fought
and went out to the war, and between the rest of the multitude.

31:28. And thou shalt separate a portion to the Lord from them that
fought and were in the battle, one soul of five hundred as well of
persons as of oxen and asses and sheep.

31:29. And thou shalt give it to Eleazar the priest, because they are
the firstfruits of the Lord.

31:30. Out of the moiety also of the children of Israel thou shalt take
the fiftieth head of persons, and of oxen, and asses, and sheep, and of
all beasts, and thou shalt give them to the Levites that watch in the
charge of the tabernacle of the Lord.

31:31. And Moses and Eleazar did as the Lord had commanded.

31:32. And the spoil which the army had taken, was six hundred seventy-
five thousand sheep,

31:33. Seventy-two thousand oxen,

31:34. Sixty-one thousand asses:

31:35. And thirty-two thousand persons of the female sex, that had not
known men.

31:36. And one half was given to them that had been in the battle, to
wit, three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep:

31:37. Out of which, for the portion of the Lord, were reckoned six
hundred seventy five sheep.

31:38. And out of the thirty-six thousand oxen, seventy-two oxen:

31:39. Out of the thirty thousand five hundred asses, sixty-one asses:

31:40. Out of the sixteen thousand persons, there fell to the portion of
the Lord, thirty-two souls.

31:41. And Moses delivered the number of the firstfruits of the Lord to
Eleazar the priest, as had been commanded him,

31:42. Out of the half of the children of Israel, which he had separated
for them that had been in the battle.

31:43. But out of the half that fell to the rest of the multitude, that
is to say, out of the three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred
sheep,

31:44. And out of the thirty-six thousand oxen,

31:45. And out of the thirty thousand five hundred asses,

31:46. And out of the sixteen thousand persons,

31:47. Moses took the fiftieth head, and gave it to the Levites that
watched in the tabernacle of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded.

31:48. And when the commanders of the army, and the tribunes and
centurions were come to Moses, they said:

31:49. We thy servants have reckoned up the number of the fighting men,
whom we had under our hand, and not so much as one was wanting.

31:50. Therefore we offer as gifts to the Lord what gold every one of us
could find in the booty, in garters and tablets, rings and bracelets,
and chains, that thou mayst pray to the Lord for us.

31:51. And Moses and Eleazar the priest received all the gold in divers
kinds,

31:52. In weight sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty sicles, from
the tribunes and from the centurions.

31:53. For that which every one had taken in the booty was his own.

31:54. And that which was received they brought into the tabernacle of
the testimony, for a memorial of the children of Israel before the Lord.

Numbers Chapter 32

The tribes of Ruben and Gad, and half of the tribe of Manasses, receive
their inheritance on the east side of Jordan, upon conditions approved
of by Moses.

32:1. And the sons of Ruben and Gad had many flocks of cattle, and their
substance in beasts was infinite. And when they saw the lands of Jazer
and Galaad fit for feeding cattle,

32:2. They came to Moses and Eleazar the priest, and the princes of the
multitude, and said:

32:3. Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nemra, Hesebon, and Eleale, and
Saban, and Nebo, and Beon,

32:4. The land, which the Lord hath conquered in the sight of the
children of Israel, is a very fertile soil for the feeding of beasts:
and we thy servants have very much cattle:

32:5. And we pray thee, if we have found favour in thy sight, that thou
give it to us thy servants in possession, and make us not pass over the
Jordan.

32:6. And Moses answered them: What, shall your brethren go to fight,
and will you sit here?

32:7. Why do ye overturn the minds of the children of Israel, that they
may not dare to pass into the place which the Lord hath given them?

32:8. Was it not thus your fathers did, when I sent from Cadesbarne to
view the land?

32:9. And when they were come as far as the valley of the cluster,
having viewed all the country, they overturned the hearts of the
children of Israel, that they should not enter into the coasts, which
the Lord gave them.

32:10. And he swore in his anger, saying:

32:11. If these men, that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old
and upward, shall see the land, which I promised with an oath to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: because they would not follow me,

32:12. Except Caleb the son of Jephone the Cenezite, and Josue the son
of Nun: these have fulfilled my will.

32:13. And the Lord being angry against Israel, led them about through
the desert forty years, until the whole generation, that had done evil
in his sight, was consumed.

32:14. And behold, said he, you are risen up instead of your fathers,
the increase and offspring of sinful men, to augment the fury of the
Lord against Israel.

32:15. For if you will not follow him, he will leave the people in the
wilderness, and you shall be the cause of the destruction of all.

32:16. But they coming near, said: We will make sheepfolds, and stalls
for our cattle, and strong cities for our children:

32:17. And we ourselves will go armed and ready for battle before the
children of Israel, until we bring them in unto their places. Our
little ones, and all we have, shall be in walled cities, for fear of the
ambushes of the inhabitants.

32:18. We will not return into our houses until the children of Israel
possess their inheritance:

32:19. Neither will we seek any thing beyond the Jordan, because we have
already our possession on the east side thereof,

32:20. And Moses said to them: If you do what you promise, go on well
appointed for war before the Lord:

32:21. And let every fighting man pass over the Jordan, until the Lord
overthrow his enemies:

32:22. And all the land be brought under him, then shall you be
blameless before the Lord and before Israel, and you shall obtain the
countries that you desire, before the Lord.

32:23. But if you do not what you say, no man can doubt but you sin
against God: and know ye, that your sin shall overtake you.

32:24. Build therefore cities for your children, and folds and stalls
for your sheep and beasts, and accomplish what you have promised.

32:25. And the children of Gad and Ruben said to Moses: We are thy
servants, we will do what my lord commandeth.

32:26. We will leave our children, and our wives and sheep and cattle,
in the cities of Galaad:

32:27. And we thy servants all well appointed will march on to the war,
as thou, my lord, speakest.

32:28. Moses therefore commanded Eleazar the priest, and Josue the son
of Nun, and the princes of the families of all the tribes of Israel, and
said to them:

32:29. If the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben pass with you
over the Jordan, all armed for war before the Lord, and the land be made
subject to you: give them Galaad in possession.

32:30. But if they will not pass armed with you into the land of
Chanaan, let them receive places to dwell in among you.

32:31. And the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben answered: As
the Lord hath spoken to his servants, so will we do:

32:32. We will go armed before the Lord into the land of Chanaan, and we
confess that we have already received our possession beyond the Jordan.

32:33. Moses therefore gave to the children of Gad and of Ruben, and to
the half tribe of Manasses the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sehon king
of the Amorrhites, and the kingdom of Og king of Basan, and their land
and the cities thereof round about.

32:34. And the sons of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,

32:35. And Etroth, and Sophan, and Jazer, and Jegbaa,

32:36. And Bethnemra, and Betharan, fenced cities, and folds for their
cattle.

32:37. But the children of Ruben built Hesebon, and Eleale, and
Cariathaim,

32:38. And Nabo, and Baalmeon (their names being changed) and Sabama:
giving names to the cities which they had built.

32:39. Moreover the children of Machir, the son of Manasses, went into
Galaad, and wasted it, cutting off the Amorrhites, the inhabitants
thereof.

32:40. And Moses gave the land of Galaad to Machir the son of Manasses,
and he dwelt in it.

32:41. And Jair the son of Manasses went, and took the villages thereof,
and he called them Havoth Jair, that is to say, the villages of Jair.

32:42. Nobe also went, and took Canath with the villages thereof: and he
called it by his own name, Nobe.

Numbers Chapter 33

The mansions or journeys of the children of Israel towards the land of
promise.

33:1. These are the mansions of the children of Israel, who went out of
Egypt by their troops under the conduct of Moses and Aaron,

The mansions... These mansions, or journeys of the children of Israel
from Egypt to the land of promise, were figures, according to the
fathers, of the steps and degrees by which Christians leaving sin are to
advance from virtue to virtue, till they come to the heavenly mansions,
after this life, to see and enjoy God.

33:2. Which Moses wrote down according to the places of their encamping,
which they changed by the commandment of the Lord.

33:3. Now the children of Israel departed from Ramesses the first month,
on the fifteenth day of the first month, the day after the phase, with a
mighty hand, in the sight of all the Egyptians,

33:4. Who were burying their firstborn, whom the Lord had slain (upon
their gods also he had executed vengeance,)

33:5. And they camped in Soccoth.

33:6. And from Soccoth they came into Etham, which is in the uttermost
borders of the wilderness.

33:7. Departing from thence they came over against Phihahiroth, which
looketh towards Beelsephon, and they camped before Magdalum.

33:8. And departing from Phihahiroth, they passed through the midst of
the sea into the wilderness: and having marched three days through the
desert of Etham, they camped in Mara.

33:9. And departing from Mara, they came into Elim, where there were
twelve fountains of waters, and seventy palm trees: and there they
camped.

33:10. But departing from thence also, they pitched their tents by the
Red Sea. And departing from the Red Sea,

33:11. They camped in the desert of Sin.

33:12. And they removed from thence, and came to Daphca.

33:13. And departing from Daphca, they camped in Alus.

33:14. And departing from Alus, they pitched their tents in Raphidim,
where the people wanted water to drink.

33:15. And departing from Raphidim, they camped in the desert of Sinai.

33:16. But departing also from the desert of Sinai, they came to the
graves of lust.

33:17. And departing from the graves of lust, they camped in Haseroth.

33:18. And from Haseroth they came to Rethma.

33:19. And departing from Rethma, they camped in Remmomphares.

33:20. And they departed from thence and came to Lebna.

33:21. Removing from Lebna they camped in Ressa.

33:22. And departing from Ressa, they came to Ceelatha.

33:23. And they removed from thence and camped in the mountain Sepher.

33:24. Departing from the mountain Sepher, they came to Arada,

33:25. From thence they went and camped in Maceloth.

33:26. And departing from Maceloth, they came to Thahath.

33:27. Removing from Thahath they camped in Thare.

33:28. And they departed from thence, and pitched their tents in Methca.

33:29. And removing from Methca, they camped in Hesmona.

33:30. And departing from Hesmona, they came to Moseroth.

33:31. And removing from Moseroth, they camped in Benejaacan.

33:32. And departing from Benejaacan, they came to mount Gadgad.

33:33. From thence they went and camped in Jetebatha.

33:34. And from Jetebatha they came to Hebrona.

33:35. And departing from Hebrona, they camped in Asiongaber.

33:36. They removed from thence and came into the desert of Sin, which
is Cades.

33:37. And departing from Cades, they camped in mount Hor, in the
uttermost borders of the land of Edom.

33:38. And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of
the Lord: and there he died in the fortieth year of the coming forth of
the children of Israel out of Egypt, the fifth month, the first day of
the month,

33:39. When he was a hundred and twenty-three years old.

33:40. And king Arad the Chanaanite, who dwelt towards the south, heard
that the children of Israel were come to the land of Chanaan.

33:41. And they departed from mount Hor, and camped in Salmona.

33:42. From whence they removed and came to Phunon.

33:43. And departing from Phunon, they camped in Oboth.

33:44. And from Oboth they came to Ijeabarim, which is in the borders of
the Moabites.

33:45. And departing from Ijeabarim they pitched their tents in
Dibongab.

33:46. From thence they went and camped in Helmondeblathaim.

33:47. And departing from Helmondeblathaim, they came to the mountains
of Abarim over against Nabo.

33:48. And departing from the mountains of Abarim, they passed to the
plains of Moab, by the Jordan, over against Jericho.

33:49. And there they camped from Bethsimoth even to Ablesatim in the
plains of the Moabites,

33:50. Where the Lord said to Moses:

33:51. Command the children of Israel, and say to them: When you shall
have passed over the Jordan, entering into the land of Chanaan,

33:52. Destroy all the inhabitants of that land: Beat down their
pillars, and break in pieces their statues, and waste all their high
places,

33:53. Cleansing the land, and dwelling in it. For I have given it you
for a possession.

33:54. And you shall divide it among you by lot. To the more you shall
give a larger part, and to the fewer a lesser. To every one as the lot
shall fall, so shall the inheritance be given. The possession shall be
divided by the tribes and the families.

33:55. But if you will not kill the inhabitants of the land: they that
remain, shall be unto you as nails in your eyes, and spears in your
sides, and they shall be your adversaries in the land of your
habitation.

33:56. And whatsoever I had thought to do to them, I will do to you.

Numbers Chapter 34

The limits of Chanaan; with the names of the men that make the division
of it.

34:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

34:2. Command the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: When
you are entered into the land of Chanaan, and it shall be fallen into
your possession by lot, it shall be bounded by these limits:

34:3. The south side shall begin from the wilderness of Sin, which is by
Edom: and shall have the most salt sea for its furthest limits eastward:

The most salt sea... The lake of Sodom, otherwise called the Dead Sea.

34:4. Which limits shall go round on the south side by the ascent of the
Scorpion and so into Senna, and reach toward the south as far as
Cadesbarne, from whence the frontiers shall go out to the town called
Adar, and shall reach as far as Asemona.

The Scorpion... A mountain so called from having a great number of
scorpions.

34:5. And the limits shall fetch a compass from Asemona to the torrent
of Egypt, and shall end in the shore of the great sea.

The great sea... The Mediterranean.

34:6. And the west side shall begin from the great sea, and the same
shall be the end thereof.

34:7. But toward the north side the borders shall begin from the great
sea, reaching to the most high mountain,

The most high mountain... Libanus.

34:8. From which they shall come to Emath, as far as the borders of
Sedada:

34:9. And the limits shall go as far as Zephrona, and the village of
Enan. These shall be the borders on the north side.

34:10. From thence they shall mark out the grounds towards the east side
from the village of Enan unto Sephama.

34:11. And from Sephama the bounds shall go down to Rebla over against
the fountain of Daphnis: from thence they shall come eastward to the sea
of Cenereth,

Sea of Cenereth... This is the sea of Galilee, illustrated by the
miracles of our Lord.

34:12. And shall reach as far as the Jordan, and at the last shall be
closed in by the most salt sea. This shall be your land with its borders
round about.

34:13. And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying: This shall be
the land which you shall possess by lot, and which the Lord hath
commanded to be given to the nine tribes, and to the half tribe.

34:14. For the tribe of the children of Ruben by their families, and the
tribe of the children of Gad according to the number of their kindreds,
and half of the tribe of Manasses,

34:15. That is, two tribes and a half, have received their portion
beyond the Jordan over against Jericho at the east side.

34:16. And the Lord said to Moses:

34:17. These are the names of the men, that shall divide the land unto
you: Eleazar the priest, and Josue the son of Nun,

34:18. And one prince of every tribe,

34:19. Whose names are these: Of the tribe of Juda, Caleb the son of
Jephone.

34:20. Of the tribe of Simeon, Samuel the son of Ammiud.

34:21. Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chaselon.

34:22. Of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bocci the son of Jogli.

34:23. Of the children of Joseph of the tribe of Manasses, Hanniel the
son of Ephod.

34:24. Of the tribe of Ephraim, Camuel the son of Sephtan.

34:25. Of the tribe of Zabulon, Elisaphan the son of Pharnach.

34:26. Of the tribe of Issachar, Phaltiel the prince, the son of Ozan.

34:27. Of the tribe of Aser, Ahiud the son of Salomi.

34:28. Of the tribe of Nephtali: Phedael the son of Ammiud.

34:29. These are they Whom the Lord hath commanded to divide the land of
Chanaan to the children of Israel.

Numbers Chapter 35

Cities are appointed for the Levites. Of which six are to be the cities
of refuge.

35:1. And the Lord spoke these things also to Moses in the plains of
Moab by the Jordan, over against Jericho:

35:2. Command the children of Israel that they give to the Levites out
of their possessions,

35:3. Cities to dwell in, and their suburbs round about: that they may
abide in the towns, and the suburbs may be for them cattle and beasts:

35:4. Which suburbs shall reach from the walls of the cities outward, a
thousand paces on every side:

35:5. Toward the east shall be two thousand cubits: and toward the south
in like manner shall be two thousand cubits: toward the sea also, which
looketh to the west, shall be the same extent: and the north side shall
be bounded with the like limits. And the cities shall be in the midst,
and the suburbs without.

35:6. And among the cities, which you shall give to the Levites, six
shall be separated for refuge to fugitives, that he who hath shed blood
may flee to them: and besides these there shall be other forty-two
cities,

35:7. That is, in all forty-eight with their suburbs.

35:8. And of these cities which shall be given out of the possessions of
the children of Israel, from them that have more, more shall be taken:
and from them that have less, fewer. Each shall give towns to the
Levites according to the extent of their inheritance.

35:9. The Lord said to Moses:

35:10. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: When
you shall have passed over the Jordan into the land of Chanaan,

35:11. Determine what cities shall be for the refuge of fugitives, who
have shed blood against their will.

35:12. And when the fugitive shall be in them, the kinsman of him that
is slain may not have power to kill him, until he stand before the
multitude, and his cause be judged.

35:13. And of those cities, that are separated for the refuge of
fugitives,

35:14. Three shall be beyond the Jordan, and three in the land of
Chanaan,

35:15. As well for the children of Israel as for strangers and
sojourners, that he may flee to them, who hath shed blood against his
will.

35:16. If any man strike with iron, and he die that was struck: he shall
be guilty of murder, and he himself shall die.

35:17. If he throw a stone, and he that is struck die: he shall be
punished in the same manner.

35:18. If he that is struck with wood die: he shall be revenged by the
blood of him that struck him.

35:19. The kinsman of him that was slain, shall kill the murderer: as
soon as he apprehendeth him, he shall kill him.

35:20. If through hatred any one push a man, or fling any thing at him
with ill design:

35:21. Or being his enemy, strike him with his hand, and he die: the
striker shall be guilty of murder: the kinsman of him that was slain as
soon as he findeth him, shall kill him.

35:22. But if by chance medley, and without hatred,

35:23. And enmity, he do any of these things,

35:24. And this be proved in the hearing of the people, and the cause be
debated between him that struck, and the next of kin:

35:25. The innocent shall be delivered from the hand of the revenger,
and shall be brought back by sentence into the city, to which he had
fled, and he shall abide there until the death of the high priest, that
is anointed with the holy oil.

Until the death, etc... This mystically signified that our deliverance
was to be effected by the death of Christ, the high priest and the
anointed of God.

35:26. If the murderer be found without the limits of the cities that
are appointed for the banished,

35:27. And be struck by him that is the avenger of blood: he shall not
be guilty that killed him.

35:28. For the fugitive ought to have stayed in the city until the death
of the high priest: and after he is dead, then shall the manslayer
return to his own country.

35:29. These things shall be perpetual, and for an ordinance in all your
dwellings.

35:30. The murderer shall be punished by witnesses: none shall be
condemned upon the evidence of one man.

35:31. You shall not take money of him that is guilty of blood, but he
shall die forthwith.

35:32. The banished and fugitives before the death of the high priest
may by no means return into their own cities.

35:33. Defile not the land of your habitation, which is stained with the
blood of the innocent: neither can it otherwise be expiated, but by his
blood that hath shed the blood of another.

35:34. And thus shall your possession be cleansed, myself abiding with
you. For I am the Lord that dwell among the children of Israel.

Numbers Chapter 36

That the inheritances may not be alienated from one tribe to another,
all are to marry within their own tribes.

36:1. And the princes of the families of Galaad, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasses, of the stock of the children of Joseph, came and spoke
to Moses before the princes of Israel, and said:

36:2. The Lord hath commanded thee, my lord, that thou shouldst divide
the land by lot to the children of Israel, and that thou shouldst give
to the daughters of Salphaad our brother the possession due to their
father:

36:3. Now if men of another tribe take them to wives, their possession
will follow them, and being transferred to another tribe, will be a
diminishing of our inheritance.

36:4. And so it shall come to pass, that when the jubilee, the is, the
fiftieth year of remission, is come, the distribution made by the lots
shall be confounded, and the possession of the one shall pass to the
others.

36:5. Moses answered the children of Israel, and said by the command of
the Lord: The tribe of the children of Joseph hath spoken rightly.

36:6. And this is the law promulgated by the Lord touching the daughters
of Salphaad: Let them marry to whom they will, only so that it be to men
of their own tribe.

36:7. Lest the possession of the children of Israel be mingled from
tribe to tribe. For all men shall marry wives of their own tribe and
kindred:

36:8. And all women shall take husbands of the same tribe: that the
inheritance may remain in the families.

36:9. And that the tribes be not mingled one with another, but remain so

36:10. As they were separated by the Lord. And the daughters of Salphaad
did as was commanded:

36:11. And Maala, and Thersa, and Hegla, and Melcha, and Noa were
married to the sons of their uncle by their father

36:12. Of the family of Manasses, who was the son of Joseph: and the
possession that had been allotted to them, remained in the tribe and
family of their father.

36:13. These are the commandments and judgment, which the Lord commanded
by the hand of Moses to the children of Israel, in the plains of Moab
upon the Jordan over against Jericho.